COMDTINST M16000.11 (SERIES), MARINE SAFETY MANUAL, VOLUME VI, PORTS AND WATERWAYS ACTIVITIES 
        
       CHAPTER 1. PORTS AND WATERWAYS SAFETY 
        
       A.  General Considerations . 
        
           1.  Objectives . 
        
               a.  To minimize deaths, personal injuries, and 
                   property loss or damage associated with 
                   vessels and onshore and offshore facilities 
                   engaged in commercial, scientific, or 
                   exploratory activity in the marine 
                   environment; 
        
               b.  To safeguard the nation's ports, waterways, 
                   port facilities, vessels, persons, and 
                   property in the vicinity of the port, from 
                   accidental destruction, damage, loss, or 
                   injury; 
        
               c.  To protect the navigable waters and adjacent 
                   shore areas of the U.S. and adjacent resources 
                   from environmental harm; and 
        
               d.  To prevent pollution of the marine environment 
                   from accidental or intentional discharges of 
                   oil, hazardous substances, dredged spoils, 
                   sewage, and wastes from vessels. 
        
           2.  Scope Of Enforcement Of Regulatory Activities . 
               The Captain of the Port (COTP) administers the 
               multimission Marine Safety and Security (MSS) and 
               Marine Environmental Protection (MEP) Programs by 
               enforcing laws and regulations for the following 
               activities: 
        
               a.  General authority for maritime enforcement of 
                   U.S. laws:   14 USC 89. 
        
               b.  Rendering aid to distressed persons, vessels, 
                   and aircraft on the high seas and waters over 
                   which the United States has jurisdiction: 14 
                   USC 88. 
        
               c.  Cooperation with any federal agency, state, 
                   territory, possession, or political 
                   subdivision thereof, or the District of 
                   Columbia: 14 USC 141. 
        
               d.  Prevention of damage to, or the destruction or 
                   loss of any vessel, bridge, or other structure 
                   on or in the navigable waters of the United 
                   States, or any land structure or shore area 
                   immediately adjacent to those waters; and 
                   protection of the navigable waters and the 
                   resources therein from environmental harm 
                   resulting from vessel or structure damage, 
                   destruction, or loss: 33 USC 1221 et seq.; 33         
                   CFR 126, 127, 160, and 164. 
 
        
        
        
        e.  Transportation of hazardous materials in vessels, 
            including the carriage of explosives or other 
            dangerous articles: 49 USC Chapter 51; 46 USC 
            Chapter 34; 49 CFR 171-180, and 450-453. 
        
        f.  Vessels carrying flammable or combustible liquids in 
            bulk as cargo: 46 USC Chapter 37; 46 CFR 30-40. 
        
        g.  Establishment of anchorage grounds and special 
            anchorage areas for vessels in the harbors, rivers, 
            bays, and other navigable waters of the United 
            States:  33 USC Chapter 10; 33 CFR 109, 110. 
        
        h.  Prevention of pollution from ships and enforcement of 
            waste reception facility requirements: 33 USC 
            Chapters 33 and 39; 33 CFR 151, 155, 157, and 158; 46 
            CFR Subchapter 0. 
        
        i.  Prevention of oil discharges into navigable waters 
            from vessels and transportation-related facilities: 
            33 USC 1231, 1321; 33 CFR 154-156. 
        
        j.  Prevention of deposits of refuse in navigable waters 
            of the United States: 33 USC 407 and 441. 
        
        k.  Handling of explosives or other dangerous cargoes 
            within or contiguous to waterfront facilities: 33 USC 
            1231; 33 CFR 126. 
        
        l.  Handling of Liquefied Hazardous Gas at waterfront 
            facilities:  33 USC 1231; 33 CFR 127. 
        
        m.  Establishment of regulated navigation areas (RNA's) 
            and limited access areas (LAA's): 33 USC 1225 and 
            1231; 50 USC 191; 33 CFR 6 and 165. 
        
        n.  Requirements to follow orders and directions of the 
            COTP and district commander: 33 USC 1223; 33 CFR 160. 
        
############
        o.  Procedures for vessel traffic management: 33 USC 1223; 
            33 CFR 161. 
        
        p.  Navigation safety regulations: 33 USC 1223; 46 USC 
            Chapter 37; 33 CFR 164. 
        
        q.  Safety zones for protection of vessels, structures, 
            water and shore areas, Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) 
            facilities, and deepwater ports (DWPs): 33 USC 1223, 
            1225, and 1509(d); 43 USC 1333; 33 CFR 147 and 165. 
 
        
        
        
           r.  Regulation of Deepwater Ports: 33 USC Chapter 29; 
               33 CFR 148-150. 
      
           s.  Enforcement of regatta regulations: 33 USC 1233- 
               1234; 33 CFR 100; Commandant Instruction 
               (COMDTINST) M16704.2 Series. 
        
           t.  Termination of unsafe operation of recreational 
               vessels! 46 USC 4308; Commandant Instruction 
               (COMDTINST) M16704.2 Series; 33 CFR 177. 
        
           u.  Surveillance of ocean dumping activities: 33 USC 
               Chapter 27; 40 CFR Subchapter H (220-233). 
        
           v.  Establishment of lightering zones: 46 USC 3715; 33 
               CFR 156. 
        
           w.  Enforcement of Load Line requirements: 46 USC 
               Chapter 51; 46 CFR 42-47. 
        
           x.  International Convention for the Safety of Life at 
               Sea (SOLAS 74/78). 
        
           y.  International Convention on Standards of 
               Certification, Training and Watchkeeping for 
               Seafarers, 1978 (STCW 78). 
        
           z.  International Convention on Load Lines, 1966 (ICLL 
               66). 
        
       3.  Primary Authorities .  The following laws provide the 
           primary authority for the Marine Safety and Security 
           Program. 
        
           a.  Ports And Waterways Safety Act (PWSA) Of 1972 . 
               The purpose of the PWSA (33 USC 1221 et seq.) is 
               to increase navigation and vessel safety, to 
               protect the marine environment, and to protect 
               life, property, and structures in, on, or 
               immediately adjacent to the navigable waters of 
               the United States.  The PWSA does not provide for 
               personnel screening programs or for emergency 
               security powers, but does provide for the 
               protection and "safe use" of the port and for 
               protection against the degradation of the marine 
               environment.  It specifically provides for the 
               establishment, operation, and maintenance of 
               vessel traffic services (VTS), control of vessel 
               movement, establishment of requirements for vessel 
               operation, and other related port safety controls. 
 
        
        
        
        b.  Port And Tanker Safety Act (PTSA) Of 1978 .  The Port 
            and Tanker Safety Act of 1978 amended the PWSA, and   
            provides the Coast Guard with broader, more    
            extensive, and explicitly stated authority.  The Act   
            addresses improvements in the supervision and control    
            over all types of vessels, foreign and domestic,    
            operating in the U.S. navigable waters, and in the    
            safety of all tank vessels, foreign and domestic,    
            which transport and transfer oil or other hazardous    
            cargoes in U.S. ports.  Additionally, the Act     
            addresses improvements in the control and monitoring    
            of vessels operating in offshore waters near our    
            coastline, and vessel manning and pilotage standards.    
            The Act also includes regulatory authority over areas    
            not previously covered, such as participation with    
            neighboring nations in coordinated vessel traffic    
            systems in boundary waters, lightering operations in    
            offshore areas, and discouraging activities such as    
            tank washing dumpings at sea in preparation for    
            loading cargoes in U.S. ports.  The Act now serves as    
            the strongest authority for the Marine Safety and    
            Security (MSS) Program, and is the basis for the    
            navigation safety regulations and the Marine Safety    
            Information System (MSIS).       
                  
############
        c.  Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (OPA 90) .  The Oil   
            Pollution Act of 1990 (OPA 90) amended the PWSA and    
            imposes new requirements on the operation of oil    
            tankers in the U.S.; addresses shortcomings in the    
            navigation safety in Prince William Sound, Alaska;    
            and enhances the Coast Guard's authority to     
            effectively regulate the conduct of oil tankers and    
            merchant marine personnel in the U.S. OPA 90, section    
            4107, amended the PWSA's vessel operating     
            requirements broadening the Coast Guard's authority    
            so that they "... may construct, operate, maintain,    
            improve or expand vessel traffic services...." In    
            addition, section 4107 requires mandatory     
            participation for "appropriate vessels" which operate    
            in a VTS area.        
                  
        d.  The Espionage Act Of 1917 .  The Espionage Act of 1917   
            provided the initial authority for a Coast Guard Port    
            Security Program during periods of national emergency.   
            Following World War I, the program was discontinued    
            until the outbreak of World War II.  The program was    
            again terminated in 1947.       
 
        
        
        
       e.  The Magnuson Act Of 1950 (50 USC 191) .  With the   
           commencement of hostilities in Korea and the   
           continuing Cold War, it was determined that broader  
           authority was required for control of vessels and  
           waterfront facilities.  The Magnuson Act of 1950   
           amended the Espionage Act of 1917.  It authorized the  
           President to institute such measures and issue such  
           rules and regulations necessary to "... govern the  
           anchorage and movement of any foreign-flag vessels in  
           the territorial waters; inspect such vessels at any  
           time; safeguard against destruction, loss or injury  
           from sabotage or other subversive acts, accidents, or  
           other causes of a similar nature, vessels, harbors,  
           ports, and waterfront facilities ... subject to the  
           jurisdiction of the United States ..." whenever the  
           President found the security of the U.S. endangered by  
           "... war; invasion; potential subversive acts and or  
           disturbances of international relations."    
                 
       f.  Executive Order (E.O.) 10173 .  President Truman,  
           finding that the security of the U.S. was endangered,   
           issued E.O. 10173 on 20 October 1950.  This order   
           directed implementation of the provisions of the   
           Magnuson Act and prescribed certain port security  
           regulations (33 CFR 6) to be enforced by the Coast  
           Guard.  This Order provided authority to prevent both  
           intentional and accidental loss or destruction of  
           vessels and waterfront facilities.  It further   
           directed all agencies and authorities of the United  
           States Government and all state and local authorities  
           to support, conform to, and assist in the enforcement  
           of these regulations.  This order was later amended by  
           Executive Orders 10277, 10352, and 11249.    
       g.  Title IX Of Public Law 99-399, The International    
           Maritime And Port Security Act As Codified In 33 USC   
           1226.  This act amended the Ports and Waterways   
           Safety Act, adding a new section - Section 7: Port,  
           Harbor and Coastal Facility Security.  This section  
           authorizes the Secretary of Transportation to carry  
           out measures to prevent or respond to an act of   
           terrorism against an individual, vessel, or public or  
           commercial structure that is subject to the   
           jurisdiction of the U.S. and located within or   
           adjacent to the marine environment, or a vessel of the  
           U.S. or an individual on board that vessel.   
 
############
              
            4.  Program Coordination And Support .  The proper   
                achievement of MSS and MEP objectives requires   
                the cooperation of all Coast Guard activities and   
                consultation with many external interests by the   
                COTP.  Consultation with representatives of the   
                maritime community, port and harbor authorities,   
                environmental groups, and other affected parties   
                is required by 33 USC 1224 (b).  Consultation   
                with state and local officials is required by   
                E.O. 12372.       
                 
            5.  Environmental Review .  Whenever the Coast Guard  
                issues a permit, promulgates a rule, or approves  
                an activity that affects the environment, it  
                raises environmental compliance concerns.   
                Construing our authorities to allow discretionary  
                enforcement of the law whenever possible (and  
                concomitant disapproval of activities via COTP   
                orders, etc) rather than to require individual  
                approvals or permits, should minimize our   
                exposure.  To the extent the Coast Guard acts so  
                to trigger environmental compliance concerns, the  
                procedures to ensure proper consideration of  
                environmental impacts is contained in COMDTINST  
                M16475.1 Series.  The issuing authority may   
                obtain from the Maintenance and Logistics Command  
                on request: advice on consultation with Federal,  
                state and local agencies to identify the   
                potential for significant environmental impacts;  
                and determinations of significant environmental  
                impacts and review of environmental    
                documentation.  Authority to sign environmental  
                documents may be delegated to the issuing   
                authority.       
 
       B.  Surveillance And Detection Policy .      
                 
            1. Authority .  A number of pollution prevention,  
               vessel inspection, and navigation laws and   
               treaties call for Coast Guard enforcement:   
                 
               a. Authority under the Federal Water Pollution  
                  Control Act (FWPCA), as amended, delegated to  
                  the Commandant enforcement authority and   
                  responsibility in cases where oil or hazardous  
                  substances are discharged in quantities which  
                  may be harmful into the navigable waters of  
                  the U.S. In addition, Coast Guard    
                  responsibility extends seaward to cover   
                  discharges in connection with activities under  
                  the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCSLA)  
                  and the Deepwater Port Act (DPA) of 1974, and  
                  discharges which may affect natural resources  
                  belonging to, appertaining to, or under the  
                  exclusive management authority of the United  
                  States (includes the resources covered by the  
                  Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management  
                  Act and the Exclusive Economic Zone).   
 
        
        
        
       b.  The Act to Prevent Pollution from Ships (APPS) (33 USC 
           1901 et seq.) implements the Protocol of 1978 relating 
           to the International Convention for the Prevention of 
           Pollution from Ships, 1973 (MARPOL 73/78).  This 
           statute limits the operational discharges of oil from 
           ships through equipment and operational requirements, 
           and provides reception facilities to receive waste 
           that cannot be discharged at sea.  The Marine Plastic   
           Pollution Research and Control Act of 1987 (P.L. 100-   
           220) amended the APPS authorizing the Coast Guard to   
           enforce Annex V of MARPOL which covers prevention of   
           pollution from plastics and garbage.  The Coast Guard   
           is tasked with APPS enforcement. 
        
       c.  The Refuse Act (33 USC 407) is enforced jointly by the 
           Coast Guard and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
           (USACE).  It has been interpreted to prohibit the 
           discharge of virtually any material into the navigable 
           waters of the U.S., but is limited in its usefulness 
           since it only provides criminal remedies (33 USC 411). 
        
############
       d.  The Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act 
           of 1972 (MPRSA) (33 USC 1401 et seq.) requires Coast 
           Guard surveillance of ocean dumping activities (see 
           chapter 5 of this volume). 
        
       e.  The PWSA (33 USC 1221 et seq.) and 46 USC Chapter 37 
           provide broad authority in the areas of safety and 
           environmental protection in ports, harbors, 
           waterfront areas, and navigable waters.  The Coast 
           Guard is further charged with regulating the carriage of 
           explosives or other dangerous articles on vessels (49 USC 
           1801 et seq.). 
        
       f.  The Shore Protection Act (SPA) (33 USC 2601 et seq.)   
           requires owners or operators of waste sources, vessels   
           transporting waste and waste reception facilities to   
           take reasonable steps to minimize the amount of   
           municipal or commercial waste deposited into coastal  
           waters during vessel loading and unloading operations  
           and during vessel transportation from a waste source  
           to receiving facilities.  The SPA prohibits vessels  
           from transporting municipal and commercial waste   
           unless they have a permit and display a number or  
           other prescribed marking, and outlines provisions for  
           enforcing these requirements.  DOT is responsible for  
           issuing permits, prescribing the number or marking  
           which vessels must display, and enforcing regulations  
           implementing the SPA.  These responsibilities have  
           been delegated to the Coast Guard.     
 
            
            2. Port Safety Surveillance .      
                 
                a.  Scope Of COTP Multimission Patrols .  The need  
                    for port safety patrols arises from the   
                    continuing potential for maritime casualties   
                    in our ports: vessel collisions or    
                    groundings, vessel or facility fires,    
                    accidental cargo discharges, discharges and   
                    releases of pollutants, any of which may   
                    cause property damage and personnel    
                    casualties or other harm to the marine   
                    environment or other national interests.   
                    Casualties may arise through negligence, lack   
                    of training or knowledge or deliberate acts.   
                    Port safety patrols are aimed at detection,  
                    deterrence and prevention of marine    
                    casualties through the enforcement of safety   
                    regulations.  The port safety patrol is a   
                    basic tool of the COTP covering a wide range   
                    of responsibilities and tasks.  In addition   
                    to inspection and response functions, patrol   
                    members are a visible enforcement arm of the   
                    COTP and the OCMI.  Ideally, they deter   
                    regulatory and statutory violations of all kinds.  
     
                 
                b.  Action Of COTP Multimission Patrols .  Patrol  
                    personnel should observe, report, and act   
                    upon, as directed by the COTP:    
                 
                    (1)  The presence and location of all vessels   
                         in authorized anchorages, (including   
                         restricted anchorages) to ensure    
                         compliance with requirements pursuant to   
                         33 USC 471 and 474 and 33 CFR 110, if   
                         applicable;      
                 
                    (2)  The presence and location of other   
                         vessels in the port area;    
                 
                    (3)  Load lines and draft markings of all   
                         vessels in the port to detect possible   
                         violations of the Load Line Act of 1986   
                         (46 USC Chapter 51, 46 CFR 41-47);   
                 
                    (4)  Vessel bunkering and lightering    
                         operations, or other transfer operations   
                         involving vessels, barges, and/or   
                         facilities within the harbor;   
                 
                    (5)  The presence of oil or hazardous   
                         substance pollution around vessels and  
                         along the waterfront;     
                 
                    (6)  The presence of any obstructions to navigation; 
                 
                    (7)  Any observed discrepancies to the  
                         operation of aids to navigation in the  
                         harbor area;      
 
############
        
        
        
           (8)  The presence of dangerous or illegal conditions   
                or situations, such as improperly moored vessels,   
                vessel or waterfront fires, or oil spills; and   
                 
           (9)  Any other matter for which the Coast Guard has  
                regulatory or statutory authority.    
                 
       c.  Employment Of Resources .       
                 
           (1)  Use Of Personnel .  A working knowledge of the  
                port area is essential to the successful   
                performance of patrol duty.  Patrols should   
                consist of two or more persons adequately trained  
                in the various regulatory requirements and duties  
                of the patrol.  It is also an effective way to  
                introduce new unit personnel to the port   
                environment.  The use of two or more person   
                patrols is especially effective in large port  
                complexes with concentrated waterfront   
                facilities, structures, and shipping activity,  
                because it provides for effective personnel   
                safety and support within potentially hazardous  
                port environments, provides a witness in case of  
                disputed actions or alleged violations of   
                requirements, and lends itself to cross training  
                and sharing experience in the execution of all  
                marine safety enforcement duties.    
                 
           (2)  Use Of Small Boats .  Small boats are most often  
                used to patrol anchorage areas, RNAs, bridge and  
                tunnel areas, and the watersides of piers and  
                wharfs; to enforce safety zones; to aid or   
                transport inspection and boarding teams; to   
                conduct boardings for the enforcement of   
                navigation and boating safety requirements (see  
                volume II of this manual, and COMDTINST M16247.1  
                Series); to participate in search and rescue  
                (SAR) operations, as required; to transport   
                government personnel or serve as a surveillance  
                platform in support of government operations and  
                to take appropriate action regarding any other  
                matter for which the Coast Guard has authority.  
                (See COMDTINST 16114 Series for required small  
                boat coxswain and crew qualifications; for   
                specific type orientation and basic operating  
                information on 211 Ports and Waterways Boat,  
                Medium (PWM), see COMDTINST M16114.23.)   
 
        
        
        
                         Security zone patrol tactics are outlined in volume    
                         VII, chapter 7, section 7.F of this manual.  In those 
                         situations where a Coast Guard boat may be required but  
 is unavailable, the COTP may request assistance from   
 local authorities having harbor patrol craft.   
                         Establishment of local agreements is encouraged.  
                 
                    (3)  Targeting .  Patrol areas should be  
                         targeted based on a thorough assessment   
                         of local risk factors, and should be   
                         aimed at achieving program goals as set   
                         forth in the Business Plan for Marine   
                         Safety, Security and Environmental   
                         Protection, COMDTINST 16000.26 Series.  
                         When evaluating areas for targeting of  
                         harbor patrols, the COTP may consider,  
                         among others, the following factors:  
                 
                         (a)  The number of vessel transfer operations of oil   
                              and/or chemicals in bulk;     
                 
                         (b)  The oil and chemical transfer   
                              operations spill rate;    
                 
                         (c)  A recent history of spills detected   
                              by the Coast Guard or the public,   
                              which were not reported by industry;   
         
                         (d)  Incidence of unknown source spills;   
                 
                         (e)  A recent history of serious cargo   
                              related accidents (e.g., fires,   
                              explosions, leaking containers,   
                              personnel injuries, etc.), or   
                              violations which could have led to   
                              serious accidents; or    
                 
                         (f)  Incidence of any activities that   
                              cause the COTP extra concern for port  
                              safety or the marine environment.   
                 
############
                    (4)  Harbor Patrol Frequencies .  Patrols are  
                         most effective when operated at    
                         irregular intervals.  To determine the   
                         frequency with which to conduct harbor   
                         patrols in a given area, COTPs and   
                         district commanders (m) should evaluate   
                         local risk factors such as the potential   
                         of the area for spills, accidents or   
                         violations, and any other pertinent   
                         information.  The COTP may also    
                         determine the appropriate mode (foot,   
                         bicycle, boat or vehicle) and time (day   
                         or night) for conducting harbor patrols   
                         to achieve the desired harbor patrol   
                         frequency.      
 
              
                    In all cases, harbor patrol frequency should   
                    be aimed at achieving the goals established   
                    by COMDTINST 16000.26 Series.     
                 
       3.  Detection .         
                 
           a.  Load Line Violations .  Under the provisions of the  
               Load Line Act of 1986, 46 USC Chapter 51, the  
               Coast Guard has established load line regulations  
               for merchant vessels.  These regulations are   
               contained in 46 CFR 41-47.  The COTP should ensure  
               that boarding team and harbor patrol personnel are  
               alert to possible load line violations.  They  
               should observe commercial vessels to ensure that  
               load lines are marked conspicuously and   
               permanently on both sides of the hull amidships.  
               Additional background and reference material on  
               load line violations may be found in volumes IV  
               and V of this manual.      
                 
               (1)  Vessel Applicability .  All oceangoing  
                    commercial vessels over 150 gross tons (GT),  
                    and existing vessels over 24 meters (79 feet)  
                    in length on foreign voyages, coastwise   
                    voyages, and Great Lakes voyages must have  
                    assigned load lines.  Naval ships, new   
                    vessels under 24 meters (79 feet) in length,  
                    existing vessels under 150 GT, fishing   
                    vessels, pleasure yachts not engaged in   
                    trade, and vessels engaged solely in voyages  
                    in U.S. inland waters are not required to  
                    have load lines.  "Existing vessel" is   
                    defined in 46 CFR 42.05-30.     
                 
               (2)  Meaning Of Markings .  Load line markings 
                    indicate the drafts at which, for various 
                    conditions and types or classes of vessels, 
                    there will still be left a sufficient  
                    percentage of reserve buoyancy to ensure the 
                    vessel's safety.  On it are indicated the  
                    maximum safe drafts for salt and fresh water,  
                    for winter and summer, and for various   
                    geographical regions defined by the Load Line  
                    Act.        
                 
               (3)  American Bureau Of Shipping Responsibility .  
                    As provided in the Load Line Act, the   
                    American Bureau of Shipping has been   
                    delegated authority to assign load lines and  
                    issue load-line certificates.  Corresponding  
                    classification societies in other nations  
                    serve the same purpose.  The authority by  
                    whom the load lines are assigned may be   
                    indicated by letters marked alongside the  
                    Plimsoll mark and above the centerline (see  
                    Figure 1-1).       
 
        
        
        
       (4)  Plimsoll Mark .  The basic load line mark is the   
            "Plimsoll mark," either a circle or diamond with a  
            horizontal line drawn through the center.  The top of  
            the line marks the center of the circle or diamond,  
            and it is from that point that the measurement is  
            taken.  The Plimsoll mark is permanently marked   
            amidships on both sides of a vessel.  Directly above  
            the Plimsoll mark is the deck line reference mark,  
            usually a painted or welded line in the shell   
            plating, from which freeboard measurements are made  
            (figure 1-1).  If the applicable seasonal freeboard  
            load line (not the Plimsoll mark) is completely   
            submerged, personnel should investigate further.  
            This may be due to the vessel's listing toward the  
            submerged mark or climatic conditions such as   
            salinity of the water.  If it is determined that both  
            load line marks are submerged, the patrol should  
            report to the duty officer, who should arrange for an  
            investigating officer (I.O.) to board the vessel and  
            conduct a load line investigation.     
 
############
        
        
        
       b.  Pollution Detection .  Patrol members should be 
           constantly alert to indications that a pollution 
           incident has taken place or may take place, 
           including: 
        
           (1)  Oil in the water, booms, or cleanup equipment; 
        
           (2)  Calmer areas on water (oil on water reduces wave 
                action); 
        
           (3)  Unusual waterfowl activity which might indicate a 
                foreign substance in the water; 
        
           (4)  Dark streaks down a vessel's hull that may 
                indicate a recent spillage over the side; 
        
           (5)  Unusual activity on the deck of a vessel, on a 
                pier, or on a beach that may indicate a discharge 
                on deck (pier, beach), such as: 
        
                (a)  Hosing down of an area in attempts to remove 
                     or disperse oil on the ground or in the 
                     water; 
        
                (b)  The dumping of absorbent or dispersant 
                     material (such as liquid soaps) into the 
                     water or on the ground; 
        
                (c)  Flashing lights indicating the presence of 
                     fire department vehicle, ambulance, etc.; 
                     and 
        
                (d)  Clusters of people on a pier or on shore; 
        
           (6)  Vapor clouds of any type, or smoke; 
        
           (7)  Overboard discharges from a vessel or any 
                discoloration of the water; 
        
           (8)  A wrecked or beached vessel; 
        
           (9)  A vessel listing or deeper than its load line, or 
                any other unusual vessel attitude; 
        
           (10) Unblanked hoses on a pier or unblanked manifolds; 
        
           (11) Runoff from storm sewers, banks and shoreline 
                after rainfall; 
        
           (12) A vessel circling in one area; or 
 
        
        
        
                   (13)  Persons painting over the side of a   
                         vessel or painting on a bridge over   
                         water.       
        
               c.  The above list is not all-inclusive, but it 
                   provides examples of activities that may 
                   warrant further investigation.  If the patrol 
                   determines that a pollution incident has 
                   occurred, the duty officer should be notified 
                   as soon as possible after discovery. 
       C.  Waterfront Facility Safety Surveys .    
                 
           1.  Introduction .        
            
               a.  A safety survey is a detailed account of a   
                   facility's physical plant, and is generally   
                   used to update information in the unit's   
                   facility file and contingency plans.  Safety  
                   surveys should be conducted at adequate   
                   intervals, as established by the COTP, to  
                   ensure that facility data are current and  
                   accurately describe the facility's physical  
                   plant.        
                 
               b.  The primary reason for conducting safety  
                   surveys of waterfront facilities is to have  
                   information readily available to assist in  
                   making a proper and well.informed response to  
                   an emergency.  Disclosure of this information  
                   by facility operators is voluntary and subject  
                   in part to the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 USC  
                   552a).  However, facility operators should be  
                   made aware that the lack of such information  
                   may impair the Coast Guard's response in the  
                   event of an emergency.  The compilation of  
                   waterfront facility data is essential for  
                   proper contingency and operational planning.  
                   In the event that this information is already  
                   contained in an approved Facility Response  
                   Plan required under 33 CFR Part 154, Subpart  
                   F, it is not necessary to perform a separate  
                   safety survey to gather this information.  
        
           2.  Elements Of A Survey .  The following list contains 
               a sampling of information gained from waterfront 
               facility safety surveys: 
        
               a.  Owner and operator names; 
        
############
               b.  Emergency phone numbers; 
        
               c.  Facility purpose;      
                 
               d.  Cargoes handled (capacity, frequency);  
 
        
        
                e.  Firefighting equipment; 
        
                f.  Pollution abatement and response equipment; 
        
                g.  Emergency equipment; 
        
                h.  Physical security equipment (e.g., guards, 
                    fences, lighting, and access 
                    control/restrictions); 
        
                i.  Physical description of facility (tanks, 
                    berths, buildings, pipelines, water intakes 
                    and permitted discharges, etc.); 
        
                j.  Special features (cranes, tugs, etc.) of 
                    aerial photographs; 
        
                k.  Operations manuals, where required; 
        
                l.  Names and emergency telephone numbers of   
                    persons authorized to immediately expend   
                    funds (without having to obtain    
                    administrative approval); and    
                 
                m.  Facility site plans, including locations of  
                    fire mains, installed sprinkler systems   
                    (including valve locations), first aid   
                    stations, and response equipment.    
                 
            3.  Completed surveys shall be reported using MSIS as  
                outlined in volume I, chapter 12 of this manual.  
        D.  Anchorage Administration . 
        
            1.  Introduction .  The Coast Guard has been delegated  
                authority to establish, administer, and enforce  
                anchorage areas, pursuant to 49 CFR 1.46. [NOTE:  
                The authority to establish special and general  
                anchorages pursuant to 33 USC 471, 474, 2030,  
                2035, and 2071 has been redelegated to district  
                commanders, see 33 CFR 1.05-1(g).]    
        
            2.  Special Anchorage Areas .  The Commandant or 
                district commander may designate certain areas as 
                special anchorage areas, in which vessels not 
                more than 65 feet in length may anchor without 
                being required to show anchor lights.  Guidance 
                on establishing special anchorage areas is found 
                in COMDTINST M16704.2 Series.  Special anchorages 
                are listed at 33 CFR 110, subpart A. 
        
            3.  Anchorage Grounds . are those areas which have been 
                established by the Commandant or district 
                commander as such.  Established anchorage grounds 
                and the regulations pertaining to each are 
                contained in 33 CFR 110, Subpart B. In some 
                cases, the anchorage ground and the special 
                anchorage area may overlap. 
 
        
        
        
           The two areas (anchorage ground & special anchorage 
           area) need to be cross referenced in the CFR when 
           doing a rulemaking. [NOTE: The term "general 
           anchorage" is frequently used as a synonym for 
           "anchorage grounds," but this usage is incorrect.  A 
           general anchorage is an area not designated 
           specifically for anchoring for special purposes such 
           as quarantine, lightering, or transferring 
           explosives.] Guidance on establishing anchorage 
           grounds is found in COMDTINST M16704.2 Series. 
        
       4.  Enforcement Activities .  Insofar as practicable, the 
           COTP should maintain a listing of vessels in the 
           anchorage grounds in the COTP zone.  This can be 
           facilitated by agreements with local pilots' 
           associations and maritime exchanges.  COTPs should 
           check vessels present in an anchorage ground to ensure 
           that they meet the criteria for that anchorage ground 
           under 33 CFR 110.  VTS's, where established, may 
           assist the COTP in anchorage administration. 
        
           a.  Enforcement Patrols .  To allow a close inspection 
               of anchored vessels, boat patrols of the anchorage 
               grounds are preferable.  This is one function of 
               the harbor patrol as outlined in subparagraph B.2. 
               Boat crews should be thoroughly familiar with the 
               regulations covering each anchorage ground they 
               are to patrol.  Supervisory personnel should be 
               proficient in piloting and navigation to the 
               extent that, if a discrepancy is believed to 
               exist, a fix of the vessel or vessels involved can 
               be obtained in the event violations are detected. 
        
############
           b.  Enforcement Records .  A record of each vessel 
               using the anchorage ground is of great help in 
               controlling anchorage and enforcing anchorage 
               regulations.  These records are not required, but 
               they are strongly encouraged in high traffic 
               density ports where the majority of users are not 
               local vessels.  The following items are 
               noteworthy: 
        
               (1)  Date-time group of vessel arrivals; 
        
               (2)  Vessel name and home port; 
        
               (3)  Vessel flag; 
        
               (4)  Length and draft; 
        
               (5)  Load line observed; 
        
               (6)  Estimated time of departure; 
 
        
        
        
                   (7)   Any special operations, such as 
                         lightering, along with the times begun 
                         and ended; and 
        
                   (8)   Any vessel limitations as to manning or 
                         maneuverability. 
        
                   [NOTE:  These records are generally for local 
                   use only, and should be destroyed when the 
                   vessel departs the anchorage, unless a 
                   violation has been noted.] 
        
               c.  Other Considerations .  In establishing an 
                   anchorage, the Coast Guard does not guarantee 
                   that the anchorage is clear of sunken, 
                   uncharted obstructions.  Accordingly, Coast 
                   Guard personnel should not make 
                   representations about the depth of an 
                   anchorage.  Nevertheless, before a COTP 
                   directs a vessel to go to a particular 
                   location in an anchorage, the COTP should be 
                   satisfied that the particular location appears 
                   safe for that vessel.  Directives to anchor in 
                   a specific location should be limited to 
                   emergencies. 
       E.  Control Of Vessel Movements . 
        
           1.  Introduction . 
        
               a.  Relevant Acts .  This part outlines procedures 
                   to be used by the COTP in fulfilling 
                   responsibilities under the PWSA (33 USC 1221- 
                   1232), regarding the movement of any vessel in 
                   U.S. waters within the COTP's area of 
                   jurisdiction.  Since the greatest threats to 
                   the safety of the port usually occur with the 
                   transport of hazardous materials, the COTP 
                   should generally concentrate efforts on that 
                   phase of waterborne traffic.  However, the 
                   COTP is equally responsible for enforcement of 
                   anchorage and navigation laws which extend 
                   beyond the commercial community. 
                   Consequently, COTP boarding teams should be 
                   alert to all violations of maritime laws and 
                   regulations. 
        
               b.  33 CFR 6 . Regulations in 33 CFR 6 provide for 
                   the protection and security of vessels, 
                   harbors, and waterfront facilities.  Under 33 
                   CFR 6.04-1 & 6.04-8, the COTP is authorized to 
                   control the movement of vessels, within the 
                   COTP zone, whenever such action is necessary 
                   to prevent damage or injury to a vessel, 
                   waterfront facility, or waters of the U.S., or 
                   to secure the rights and obligations of the 
                   U.S. 
 
        
        
        
           c.  33 USC 1223; 33 CFR 160.101-115 . These authorities 
               provide that vessel traffic controls may be 
               imposed in areas determined to be hazardous, or 
               under conditions of reduced visibility, adverse 
               weather, vessel congestion, or other hazardous 
               circumstances by the following: 
        
               (1)  Specifying times of entry, movement, or 
                    departure; 
        
               (2)  Establishing vessel traffic routing schemes; 
        
               (3)  Establishing vessel size, speed, and draft 
                    limitations, and vessel operating conditions; 
                    and 
        
               (4)  Restricting vessel operation, in a hazardous 
                    area or under hazardous conditions, to 
                    vessels which have particular operating 
                    characteristics or capabilities considered 
                    necessary for safe operation. 
        
           d.  33 CFR 161.1-60; 33 CFR 1.01-30; 33 CFR 160.5 . The | 
               provisions set forth in 1.01-30 (Captains of the 
               Port) and 160.5 (Delegations) delegate certain 
               COTP vessel traffic management duties to the 
               Commanding Officers of VTSs.  This authority is 
               subject to the supervision of the COTP and may be 
               redelegated by the Commanding Officer, Vessel  
               Traffic Services.  The following are the COTP  
               duties which have been redelegated:    
                 
############
               (1)  Directing the operation, movement, and  
                    anchoring of vessels within a VTS area;  
                 
               (2)  Managing of vessel traffic within anchorages  
                    and;        
                 
               (3)  Enforcing VTS and ports and waterways safety 
                    regulations. 
            
               Additionally, regulations contained in 33 CFR 161 
               set forth VTS regulations applicable within 
               established VTS areas. 
        
       2.  Considerations In Exercising PWSA Authority .  The PWSA 
           serves an important dual purpose.  It bolsters Coast 
           Guard authority and capability to handle current 
           problems in marine safety and environmental 
           protection; it also provides the permanent statutory 
           basis for the Coast Guard's port safety activities. 
           The purpose of the statute is to prevent damage to, or 
           the destruction or 
 
        
        
        
       loss of, any vessel, bridge, or other structure on or in 
       the navigable waters of the United States, or any land 
       structure or shore area immediately adjacent to those 
       waters; and to protect the navigable waters and the 
       resources therein from environmental harm resulting from 
       damage to the vessel or shore structures. 
        
       a. Controls .         
                 
          (1)  Regulations in 33 CFR 160.101-160.115 were   
               developed to implement portions of the PWSA by  
               delegating to district commanders and COTPs   
               authority to handle emergency or temporary   
               situations.  Effectively, the Commandant has   
               delegated to COTPs and district commanders the  
               authority to temporarily control a vessel in   
               hazardous areas or during hazardous    
               circumstances, and to direct the movement of a  
               vessel when necessary to prevent damage to, or  
               by, that vessel.  The general thrust of 33 CFR  
 
  
  
                                 CONTENTS 
  
  SECTION                                                             PAGE 
  
  2.H.          Implied Consent Agreements                             2-12 
  2.H.1.            General                                            2-12 
  2.H.2.            Procedures                                         2-12 
  
  2.I.          Quality Assurance Programs                             2-12 
  2.I.1.            General                                            2-12 
  2.I.2.            Criteria                                           2-12 
 
  
  
  CHAPTER 2.  DEEPWATER PORTS (DWP's) 
  
  A.  Authority .  The authority for Department of Transportation (DOT) licensing and 
      inspection of DWP's is contained in the Deepwater Port Act of 1974 (DPA), as 
      amended (33 USC 1501 et seq.), and 33 CFR 148-150.  Licenses for a DWP are 
      issued and signed by the Secretary of the Department of Transportation 
      (SECDOT).  The SECDOT has delegated most regulatory responsibilities imposed 
      by the DPA to the Commandant, including the processing of license 
      applications.  The SECDOT has, however, retained the authority to issue, 
      transfer, amend, or renew DWP licenses (49 CFR 1.44(o)(7)).  The Commandant 
      has further delegated enforcement responsibility for DWP's to the captain of 
      the port (COTP) where the DWP is located (33 CFR 1.01-30).  For information on 
      DWP safety zones, see chapter 1 of this volume. 
  B.  Coast Guard Responsibilities .  The Coast Guard has the following DWP-related 
      responsibilities: 
  
      1.  Commandant (G-WPE) . 
  
          a.  Coordinates DWP activities for the Program Manager, Commandant (G-W); 
  
          b.  Processes DWP license applications; 
  
          c.  Develops mission performance standards for DWP activities; 
  
          d.  Reviews environmental monitoring programs for DWP's and annually 
              inspects DWP's for compliance with environmental regulatory 
              requirements; 
            e.  Prepares changes to the DWP regulations in 33 CFR Subchapter NN;   
          f.  Prepares the annual report to Congress required by the DPA; 
  
          g.  Establishes DWP safety zones; 
  
          h.  Processes exemption requests under 33 CFR 148, Subpart F; and 
  
          i.  Processes requests for major construction changes to DWP's for 
              approval by Commandant (G-W). 
  
############
      2.  Commandant (G-MVI) . 
  
          a.  Provides technical review of DWP applications and design proposals; 
  
          b.  Provides technical support to Commandant (G-WPE) and the Program 
              Manager, as requested, in administering the DPA and associated 
              regulations; and 
  
          c.  Reviews and approves modifications to DWP construction drawings and 
              specifications, with the assistance of Commandant (G-MTH); 
 
  
  
  2.B.3.  Commandant (G-WFR) .  Administers activities relating to the Deepwater Port 
          Liability Fund established in the DPA. 
  
      4.  District Commander (m) . 
  
          a.  Acts as Program Manager for Coast Guard DWP-related activities within 
              the district. 
  
          b.  Reviews the quarterly Coast Guard Enforcement Activities Report for 
              Deepwater Port Offshore Platforms, Form CG-5402, submitted by 
              cognizant COTP's, for accounting accuracy and completeness, and 
              forwards it to Commandant (G-WPE) within 30 days after the end of each 
              quarter.  Figure 2-1, found on pages 2-3 through 2-5, may be 
              duplicated locally. 
  
          c.  Answers questions from COTP's regarding the DPA, DWP regulations, 
              and/or Coast Guard policy, or forwards these questions to Commandant 
 
 
FIGURE 2-2 
 
LOOP LOCATION 
 
  
  
  2.C.4.  Application Evaluation .  Commandant (G-W) reviews DWP applications and 
          design proposals with support from Commandant (G-MVI) and (G-MTH) 
          technical staffs.  Commandant (G-MVI) and (G-MTH) and other offices as 
          appropriate, review DWP proposed sites, Operations Manuals, structures, 
          and pipelines.  The application must be reviewed by the Coast Guard within 
          21 days after submittal to verify that all the information required by 33 
          U.S.C. 1503 and 1505 (33 CFR 148 Subparts B and E and Appendix A) is 
          included.  If the application is not complete or is inaccurate, the 
          applicant will be notified within the 21-day period and given the 
          opportunity to amend the application. 
  
          a.  Site Evaluation .  DWP license applicants must conduct site evaluations 
              prior to submitting their proposals, in accordance with 33 CFR 
 
  
  
  2.D.  Operations Manual . 
  
      1.  Development .  Licensees are required by 33 CFR 150.105 to prepare an 
          Operations Manual for the DWP in accordance with "Guidelines for 
          Preparation of a Deepwater Port Operations Manual."  This publication is 
          available from Commandant (G-WPE-1).  During development of draft manuals, 
          comments will be provided by cognizant staffs in the office of the SECDOT, 
          the Coast Guard, and other government agencies.  DWP operations cannot 
          begin until the Operations Manual is approved. 
  
      2.  Enforcement .  The COTP shall ensure that DWP operations are conducted in 
          accordance with the provisions of an approved Operations Manual.  Each 
          COTP shall maintain an approved updated copy of the Operations Manual for 
          each DWP in their zone.  The COTP may require amendments to, or authorize 
          deviations from, the Operations Manual as provided in 33 CFR 150 Subpart A. 
  E.  Exemptions And Deviations . 
  
      1.  Exemptions .  Under 33 CFR 148 Subpart F, any person required to comply 
          with any specific requirements in 33 CFR Subchapter NN may submit a 
          petition in writing to Commandant (G-W) for an exemption.  Commandant 
 
  
  
  2.F.1.  (cont'd) amplification may be helpful.  If a checklist for a DWP 
          inspection is desired, it should be developed locally: 
  
          a.  Structural Inspections .  The licensee is required to conduct 
              inspections of the platform structures.  Coast Guard inspectors shall 
              ensure that the licensee's inspection program is current, and that 
              deficiencies are corrected in a timely manner. 
  
############
          b.  Transfer Piping .  Safe operation of the main oil transfer piping is a 
              joint responsibility of the Coast Guard and the DOT's Research and 
              Special Programs Administration (RSPA), Office of Pipeline Safety 
              (OPS).  The regional OPS office should be contacted by the COTP when 
              irregularities are encountered during inspections. 
  
          c.  Single Point Moorings (SPM's) .  The Coast Guard requires a DWP 
              licensee to obtain an American Bureau of Shipping (ABS) "Interim Class 
              Certificate" or a "Classification Certificate" for every SPM prior to 
              operation of the facility.  Inspectors shall ensure the licensee 
              maintains each SPM in class, and that hoses and hawsers for the SPM 
              are inspected in accordance with 33 CFR 150.405 and the DWP Operations 
              Manual.  If the mooring or oil transfer limits are set by readings of 
              mooring load monitors, these devices must operate properly during 
              transfer in accordance with the approved plans. 
  
          d.  Means Of Escape .  The approved design of the pumping platform complex 
              will require a certain number of fixed and unfixed means of escape (33 
              CFR 149.421).  Inspectors shall check the overall condition of, and 
              accessibility from, each platform level to the water's surface. 
              Inspectors shall also be alert to any modifications that may have 
              degraded or reduced the required number of means of escape. 
  
          e.  Personnel Landings And Transfer Systems .  Personnel landings shall be 
              inspected to ensure they are in good condition and well maintained, 
              with adequate guardrails and sufficient lighting to accommodate 
              personnel safely.  If the platform has swing-ropes installed, 
              inspectors shall pay close attention to the ropes themselves and to 
              the chains and shackles usually used for attaching the swing-ropes to 
              the structure.  The "Billy Pugh" not or other transfer system utilized 
              by a crane-equipped platform shall be thoroughly inspected (see volume 
              II of this manual).  All lines and their attachments, including the 
              crane hook, shall also be checked for general condition.  Whenever 
              possible, inspectors should observer the transfer system in operation. 
  
          f.  Guardrails, Fences, And Toeboards .  Inspectors shall ensure that all 
 
  
  
  2.F.1.  g.  Firefighting Systems .  Firefighting equipment requirements are listed 
              in 33 CFR 149.451-517 and 33 CFR 150.504-507.  Under 33 CFR 149.402, 
              all excess equipment must be Coast Guard-approved.  Inspectors shall 
              also verify that all firefighting equipment maintenance and 
              inspections required by the Operations Manual have been carried out. 
  
          h.  Lifesaving Equipment .  Lifesaving equipment requirements are listed in 
              33 CFR 149.521-537 and 33 CFR 150.508.  All excess equipment must be 
              Coast Guard-approved in accordance with 33 CFR 149.402.  NVIC 2-63, 
              "Guide for Inspection and Repair of Lifesaving Equipment," and volume 
              II of this manual may also be consulted. 
  
          i.  Leak And Malfunction Detection Systems .  Inspectors shall ensure all 
              elements of this system are operational and that alarm levels are set 
              in accordance with the Operations Manual. 
  
          j.  Emergency Power Systems .  Each pumping platform complex is required to 
              have an emergency power source capable of providing sufficient power 
              to operate the following equipment for a continuous 8-hour period: 
  
              (1)  Emergency lighting circuits; 
  
              (2)  ATON equipment; 
  
############
              (3)  Communications equipment; 
  
              (4)  Radar equipment; 
  
              (5)  Alarm systems; and 
  
              (6)  Electrically-operated fire pumps and other emergency electrical 
                   equipment systems, as specified in the Operations Manual. 
  
              Inspectors shall ensure this emergency power system is operational by 
              requiring it to be operated under load. 
  
          k.  Manning.  Qualifications are specified in 33 CFR 150 Subpart B for the 
              following positions:  port superintendent, cargo transfer supervisor, 
              cargo transfer assistant, vessel traffic supervisor, mooring master, 
              and assistant mooring master.  All of these personnel must know the 
              procedures specified in the DWP Operations Manual for their respective 
              positions, and be able to read, write, and speak English.  33 CFR 
              150.525 specifies qualifications for emergency medical technicians. 
  
      2.  Deficiencies .  All deficiencies discovered during inspections shall be 
          reported to the licensee, as well as to the COTP.  Correction of 
          deficiencies must be performed in accordance with the lincense.  Under 33 
          CFR 150.425, the Coast Guard may take immediate action when required to 
          prevent the discharged or threat of discharge of oil, or to protect the 
          safety of life and property. 
 
 
 
  2.G.  Vessel Examinations .  Vessels calling at a DWP, regardless of flag, are 
      subject to the same laws, regulations, and policies are vessels calling at 
      other ports under U.S. jurisdiction.  Inspections, examinations, and monitors, 
      as appropriate, shall be conducted in accordance with the guidance in volume 
      II of this manual and Commandant Instruction (COMDTINST) 5010.8 (Series). 
  H.  Implied Consent Agreements . 
  
      1.  General.  Congress amended the DPA in 1984 to make DWP's more economically 
          viable, by reducing the number of special DWP requirements.  One of these 
          amendments was the replacement of the requirement for bilateral agreements 
          with each country whose vessels wanted to call at a DWP, by implied 
          consent.  Essentially, vessels of a nation which does not object to U.S. 
          jurisdiction at a DWP may now call at that DWP without entering into a 
          written bilateral agreement.  Existing bilateral agreements remain in 
          effect unless rescinded by one of the party nations. 
  
      2.  Procedures .  In October 1984, the State Department contacted the 
          governments of all maritime nations explaining that their vessels will be 
          subject to the jurisdiction of the United States while at a U.S. DWP, 
          absent a government's objection.  Any country which does not accept U.S. 
          jurisdiction at a DWP must present their objection formally to the State 
          Department.  Upon receipt of such an objection, the State Department will 
          notify the Commandant (G-WPE), who will immediately notify the cognizant 
          district commander (m) and the DWP licensee.  Upon notification of receipt 
          of the objection, the cognizant COTP shall deny (and the licensee shall 
          not permit) entry to all vessels of the objecting country to U.S. DWP's. 
          The State Department will officially inform the licensee by letter that 
          vessels of that nation are not permitted to call at the DWP, in accordance 
          with the DPA.  As of 18 October 1985, Mexico is the only nation that has 
          objected to U.S. jurisdiction at a DWP; consequently, Mexican-flag vessels 
          are denied entry to DWP's. 
  I.  Quality Assurance Programs . 
  
############
      1.  General.  DWP licensees should have Coast Guard-approved quality assurance 
          plans established prior to commencing operations.  A quality assurance 
          program ensures that the final development and operation of the DWP is 
          executed as proposed and authorized.  Such a program coordinates 
          inspection, testing, and fabrication of materials; procurement, handling, 
          shipping and storage; processing of documentation; and correction of 
          discrepancies.  An essential requirement is that quality assurance 
          personnel are as far removed as possible from those responsible for 
          project costs and progress.  Also important is a continuing chain of 
          documentations to ensure that discrepancies are targeted and corrected 
          rapidly. 
  
      2.  Criteria .  10 CFR 50 Appendix B prescribes the quality assurance criteria 
          for nuclear power and fuel reprocessing plants.  While a deepwater 
          petroleum port need not incorporate such extreme safeguards in its 
          program, these requirements do provide an excellent framework by which a 
          DWP program may be evaluated. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3.  BRIDGE ADMINISTRATION (BA) PROGRAM 
 
CONTENTS 
  
  SECTION                                                             PAGE 
  
  3.A.          Introduction                                           3-1 
  3.A.1.            Authority                                          3-1 
  3.A.2.            Regulations                                        3-1 
  
  3.B.          Management Activities                                  3-1 
  
  3.C.          Statutory Changes                                      3-2 
  
  3.D.          Reports Of Violations                                  3-2 
  
  3.E.          Program Coordination                                   3-2 
 
  
  
  CHAPTER 3.  BRIDGE ADMINISTRATION (BA) PROGRAM 
  
  
  A.  Introduction . 
  
      1.  Authority .  Several bridge statutes, as amended, give the Department of 
          Transportation (DOT) authority for administration of laws governing 
          bridges and causeways crossing the navigable waters of the United States. 
          The Secretary of the DOT (SECDOT) delegated this authority to the 
          Commandant of the Coast Guard under 49 CFR 1.46(c); the Commandant has 
          further delegated certain permitting authority to the Chief, Office of 
          Navigation (G-N) under 33 CFR 1.01-60(a) and to the district commanders 
          under 33 CFR 1.01-60(b).  The statutes governing bridges and causeways 
          pertain to: 
  
          a.  Approval of bridge location and plans for navigational clearances (33 
              U.S.C. 401, 491, 525, 535); 
  
          b.  Regulation of the operation of drawbridges (33 U.S.C. 494, 499); 
  
          c.  Alteration of bridges obstructing navigation (33 U.S.C. 494, 495, 502, 
              511 et seq.); and 
  
          d.  Approval of bridge lighting configurations (14 U.S.C. 84, 85, 92, 633; 
              33 U.S.C. 494). 
  
      2.  Regulations .  To implement these statutes, the Coast Guard has published 
          the following regulations in 33 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter J (Bridges): 
  
          a.  Part 114 - General; 
  
          b.  Part 115 - Bridge Locations and Clearances; Administrative Procedures; 
  
          c.  Part 116 - Alteration of Obstructive Bridges; 
  
          d.  Part 117 - Drawbridge Operation Regulations; and 
  
          e.  Part 118 - Lighting of Bridges. 
  
  B.  Management Activities .  Commandant (G-NBR) administers the BA Program and 
      publishes the Bridge Administration Manual, Commandant Instruction (COMDTINST) 
      M16590.5.  A bridge administrator in the district (oan) branch (or, in some 
      cases, in a section of the district (oan) branch) manages the program at the 
      district level.  Inquiries about the BA Program should be forwarded to the 
      appropriate district bridge administrator.  [NOTE:  While this program is 
      administered separately from the Port and Environmental Safety (PES) and 
      Waterways Management (WWM) Programs, the concerns of these programs are 
      linked.  Liaison should be maintained between the captain of the port (COTP) 
      and the district bridge administrator to ensure that port and navigation 
      safety objectives are mutually achieved.] 
 
############
  
    3.C.  
Statutory Changes .  The Coast Guard Authorization Act of 1982 amended the 
      authority granted under the bridge statutes to: 
  
      1.  Exempt bridges across certain waters from the requirement to be permitted 
          by the Coast Guard (see the Bridge Administration Manual for a discussion 
          of which waters); 
  
      2.  Add civil penalty provisions to the existing authority to pursue criminal 
          penalties for violations; 
  
      3.  Prohibit a vessel from unnecessarily requiring a drawbridge to be opened; 
  
      4.  Prohibit any person from delaying opening of a drawbridge after proper 
          signal has been given; and 
  
      5.  Prohibit an owner or operator from failing to maintain a bridge adequately. 
  
  D.  Reports Of Violations .  Reports of alleged violations of the bridge 
      administration statutes or regulations may be submitted by Coast Guard 
      personnel, local law enforcement and other federal agencies, towing companies 
      and other industry concerns, and private citizens.  Such reports, made by 
      telephone or in writing, may allege illegal construction activities, 
      deviations from approved plans, failure to open a drawbridge, etc.  These 
      reports shall be forwarded promptly to the district bridge administrator. 
  
  E.  Program Coordination .  Occasionally the district bridge administrator may 
      require assistance from other Coast Guard resources for a specific 
      investigative or enforcement action.  In such cases, the administrator will 
      specify requirements and instructions in the request for assistance. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4.  VESSEL TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
 
CONTENTS 
  
  SECTION                                                                    PAGE 
   
  4.A.          General Traffic Management Concepts                           4-1 
  4.A.1.            Introduction                                              4-1 
  4.A.2.            Management Levels                                         4-1 
  4.A.2.a.              Passive Management                                    4-1 
  4.A.2.b.              Active Management                                     4-1 
  4.A.3.            Ports And Waterways Safety Act Of 1972 (PWSA)             4-2 
  
  4.B.          Aids To Navigation                                            4-2 
  4.B.1.            Federally-Maintained Aids                                 4-2 
  4.B.2.            Privately-Maintained Aids                                 4-2 
  4.B.2.a.              Class I                                               4-2 
  4.B.2.b.              Class II                                              4-2 
  4.B.2.c.              Class III                                             4-2 
  4.B.3.            Captain Of The Port (COTP), Officer In Charge, 
                    Marine Inspection (OCMI), VTS Involvement                 4-2 
  4.B.4.            Reported ATON Discrepancies                               4-3 
  
  4.C.          Navigation Rules                                              4-3 
  
  4.D.          Voice Communications                                          4-3 
  4.D.1.            Vessel Bridge-To-Bridge Radiotelephone Act                4-3 
  4.D.2.            Use Of VHF Channel 13                                     4-4 
  
  4.E.          Vessel Routing Systems                                        4-4 
  
  4.F.          Use Of RNA's                                                  4-4 
  
  4.G.          Coast Guard VTS                                               4-4 
  4.G.1.            Vessel Control Considerations                             4-4 
  4.G.2.            VTS Operating Procedures And Regulations                  4-5 
  4.G.2.a.              Commandant (G-WWM)                                    4-5 
  4.G.2.b.              VTS Participation                                     4-5 
  4.G.2.c.              VTS Operating Procedures                              4-5 
  4.G.2.d.              User Manuals                                          4-5 
  4.G.2.e.              VTS Regulations                                       4-5 
  4.G.2.f.              Changes To VTS Operating Procedures Or Regulations    4-6 
  4.G.3.            Operations                                                4-6 
  4.G.3.a.              General                                               4-6 
  4.G.3.b.              Relaying Information                                  4-7 
  4.G.4.            System Requirements                                       4-7 
  4.G.5.            System Communications                                     4-7 
  4.G.5.a.              General                                               4-7 
  4.G.5.b.              Operative Requirements                                4-7 
  4.G.6.            Personnel                                                 4-8 
  4.G.6.a.              Operational Needs                                     4-8 
  4.G.6.b.              Civilian Personnel                                    4-8 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  SECTION                                                                    PAGE 
  
  4.G.7.        Statistics Gathering                                          4-8 
  4.G.7.a.          Standardized Statistical Data                             4-8 
  4.G.7.a.(1)           Transit Statistics                                    4-8 
  4.G.7.a.(1)(a)            Transits                                          4-9 
  4.G.7.a.(1)(b)            Intra-VTS Transits                                4-9 
  7.G.7.a.(1)(c)            Port Movements                                    4-9 
  4.G.7.a.(2)           Participation Rate                                    4-9 
  4.G.7.a.(3)           Secondary Functions                                   4-9 
  4.G.7.a.(4)           Equipment Status                                      4-9 
  4.G.7.a.(5)           Casualty Data                                         4-9 
  4.G.7.b.          Subjective Data                                           4-9 
  4.G.7.c.          Reporting Requirements                                    4-9 
  4.G.8.        VTS Support Of Other Coast Guard And Government Activities    4-9 
  4.G.8.a.          Maritime Defense Zone (MDZ)                               4-10 
  4.G.8.b.          SAR And Maritime Law Enforcement (MLE)                    4-10 
  4.G.8.c.          Aids To Navigation And Anchorage Administration           4-10 
 
  
  
  CHAPTER 4.  VESSEL TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
  
############
  A.  General Traffic Management Concepts . 
  
      1.  Introduction .  Vessel traffic management encompasses a wide range of Coast 
          Guard activities and tools including aids to navigation, vessel routing 
          systems, Regulated Navigated Areas (RNA's), Navigation Rules, voice 
          communications, and Vessel Traffic Services (VTS).  Vessel traffic 
          management attempts to establish two basic principles:  good order and 
          predictability.  The objectives served by these principles include: 
  
          a.  Reduction in the rate of collisions, rammings, and groundings, and 
              ensuing environmental harm; 
  
          b.  Facilitation of vessel traffic movement; 
  
          c.  Provision for all-weather navigation capability in certain areas; and 
  
          d.  Reduction in the rate of fire, explosion, and pollution casualties, 
              and the probability of a port or waterway catastrophe. 
  
      2.  Management Levels .  Coast Guard vessel traffic management exists on two 
          distinct levels:  passive and active. 
  
          a.  Passive Management .  Passive traffic management is any form of traffic 
              management where extent of compliance is vested solely with the user. 
              The "rules of the road," traffic separation schemes, and RNA's are all 
              forms of passive management.  Depending on the configuration of a 
              particular port or waterway and the complexity of its vessel traffic 
              patterns, one or more passive management techniques or procedures may 
              be established to achieve a desired level of safety and protection of 
              the environment.  Passive traffic management can be very 
 
  
  
  4.A.3.  Ports And Waterways Safety Act Of 1972 (PWSA) .  The PWSA, as amended by 
          the Port and Tanker Safety Act of 1978 (PTSA) (33 U.S.C. 1221 et seq.), 
          provides the basic authority for the Waterways Management (WWM) Program, 
          particularly to establish and operate VTS's, to establish traffic 
          separation schemes and fairways, RNA's, and safety zones, and to require 
          carriage of specified navigation and communication equipment. 
  
  B.  Aids To Navigation . 
  
      1.  Federally-Maintained Aids .  The ATON Program of the Coast Guard is 
 
  
  
  4.B.3.  (cont'd) navigation play a great part in marine safety, it is important 
          for these officers to maintain contact with the district ATON branch; 
          likewise, they should be apprised of changes in aids within their zones. 
          Marine safety personnel frequently receive comments and suggestions about 
          aids to navigation from mariners; these comments should be forwarded to 
          the district ATON branch.  The COTP, OCMI and VTS should encourage their 
          personnel to transit the area, whenever practicable.  This provides 
          insight into the ATON system and familiarity with the area. 
  
      4.  Reported ATON Discrepancies .  Due to the close association with marine 
          interests, the OCMI, COTP or VTS will occasionally receive reports of ATON 
          discrepancies.  Such reports should note, as a minimum, how far and in 
          what direction buoys may be off-station; what components on buoys or 
          structures have been damaged; what signals or features are improper or 
          inoperative, and what is the current signal or status; the suspected cause 
          of the malfunction or improper stationing of the buoy; on-scene weather 
          conditions; hazardous conditions created; the name of the person or vessel 
          reporting; and the identity (if known) of the party causing the damage. 
          This information should be immediately relayed to the district ATON 
          branch.  Since certain aids are more critical than others, immediate 
          action cannot be taken to correct all discrepancies.  However, they must 
          be recorded so that appropriate response will occur. 
  
############
  C.  Navigation Rules .  The regulations, formerly referred to as the "Rules of the 
      Road," have the primary purpose of preventing collisions between vessels. 
      Under authority of the Inland Navigational Rules Act of 1980 (33 U.S.C. 
 
  
  
  4.D.2.  Use Of VHF Channel 13 .  VHF-FM Channel 13 (156.65 mHz) has been designated 
          as the vessel bridge-to-bridge radiotelephone frequency (see 33 CFR 
          26.04).  Two exceptions to this are the use of Channel 16 on the Great 
          Lakes and Channel 67 on the Lower Mississippi River (Baton Rouge area). 
          Generally, Coast Guard shore units, with the exception of those providing 
          VTS, may not use these frequencies; authorization for such units to use 
          them must be obtained from Commandant (G-N). 
  
  E.  Vessel Routing Systems .  Ship routing is a complex series of measures 
      concerning routes aimed at reducing the risk of casualties.  It includes 
      traffic separation schemes, two-way routes, tracks, areas to be avoided, 
      inshore traffic zones, and deepwater routes.  The International Maritime 
      Organization (IMO) is recognized as the international body responsible for 
      establishing and recommending measures concerning ships' routing.  The IMO 
      publication Ships' Routing contains definitions, symbols, and guidance for 
      establishing routing measures.  Ship routing measures within U.S. waters are 
      established through the regulatory process; all proposed routing measures, 
      whether in international or inland waters, must be submitted to Commandant 
 
  
  
  4.G.1.  (cont'd)  vessel.  The master may choose to disregard an order to the 
          extent necessary to avoid endangering persons, property, or the 
          environment, and must report all such actions promptly to the VTC. 
  
      2.  VTS Operating Procedures And Regulations . 
  
          a.  Commandant (G-WWM) .  Commandant (G-WWM), as the VTS Program Manager, 
              is responsible for ensuring VTS procedures and operations are 
              standardized as closely as possible, and remain consistent with Coast 
              Guard vessel traffic management policies and internationally approved 
              guidelines.  It is therefore necessary that VTS operating procedures, 
              user manuals, and regulations are reviewed and approved as appropriate 
              by Commandant (G-WWM) prior to publication. 
  
          b.  VTS Participation .  Participation in Coast Guard operated VTS is 
              generally aimed at those vessels required to comply with the Vessel 
 
  
  
  4.G.2.  e.  (cont'd)  in a high level of effectiveness, making voluntary 
              participation the preferred approach.  Other factors such as 
              legislation requirements, international agreements, and low user 
              acceptance and participation may require regulatory action.  Where the 
              district commander feels a change in status is desirable, appropriate 
              recommendations should be forwarded to Commandant (G-WWM) after 
              consultation with established advisory committee's and other maritime 
              interests as appropriate. 
  
          f.  Changes To VTS Operating Procedures Or Regulations .  After 
              establishment of a VTS, changes to VTS operating procedures, user 
              manuals, or regulations may be necessary to fine-tune VTS operations. 
              These changes could be the result of operating experience, increased 
              or decreased port activity, or recommendations from the maritime 
              community or advisory committees.  Regulations should only be 
              published after a thorough evaluation of operating procedures. 
              Changes to the regulations should be minimized and be made only when 
              absolutely necessary.  A goal of a minimum of 5 years between changes 
              is desirable.  The following guidelines shall be adhered to in making 
              changes to VTS operating procedures, user manuals, or regulations: 
  
############
              (1)  As VTS Program Manager, Commandant (G-WWM) is responsible for 
                   preparation and processing of VTS regulations.  All new 
                   regulations and any changes to existing regulations must be 
                   processed under the procedures established by the Administrative 
                   Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. 551.  Unilateral district or VTS action 
                   which may modify existing regulations, or make VTS-related 
                   activities mandatory through issuance of Notice to Mariners shall 
                   be initiated only after consultation with Commandant (G-WWM) and 
                   district legal staff. 
  
              (2)  District commanders shall ensure copies of changes to the VTS 
                   operating procedures and revised user manuals are forwarded to 
                   Commandant (G-WWM) as soon as they are approved. 
  
      3.  Operations . 
  
          a.  General.  Operation of the VTS shall conform to applicable federal 
              regulations, district commander's or COTP's Orders, and shall be 
              consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the VTS 
              program.  Any apparent conflict between the VTS operating procedures 
              and legal requirements shall be brought to the attention of the 
              district commander for resolution.  The VTS is responsible for the 
              safe movement of vessels in its area; to this end, the VTC shall 
              maintain direct communications with every vessel required to, or 
              choosing to, participate in the service.  The objective of a VTS is 
              the safe and efficient flow of traffic through a waterway.  Other 
              Coast Guard activities (such as SAR coordination, anchorage 
              administration, and ATON surveillance) may be handled through the VTC; 
              this should be done only on a not-to-interfere basis with traffic 
              management operations. 
 
  
  
  4.G.3.  b.  Relaying Information .  The VTC shall promptly relay all orders from 
              the COTP or district commander to vessels in the area.  If the VTC 
              watch supervisor determines the order cannot or should not be followed 
              due to conditions in the waterway, the supervisor shall advise the 
              COTP or district commander of the situation immediately.  After 
              evaluating this information, the COTP or district commander shall 
              determine the actions to be taken.  The principle that the vessel's 
              master or the pilot controlling the vessel's maneuvers is the final 
              authority for the vessel's safe navigation will not be supplanted or 
              usurped. 
  
      4.  System Requirements .  Commandant (G-WWM) has established basic Specific 
          Operating Requirements (SOR's) for VTS radars, communications, television, 
          computers and the VTC.  These SOR's document equipment requirements which 
          are supplemented or modified as necessary for each particular project in 
          the actual Statement of Work (SOW).  District commanders responsible for 
          equipment replacement projects should consider these SOR's in project 
          planning.  Deviations as necessary should be coordinated with Commandant 
 
  
  
  4.G.5.  b.  (cont'd)  the distress and calling frequency, VHF-FM Channel 16, as 
              long as they are fully participating in the system.  The VTC is 
              responsible for informing vessels of information/Local Notice to 
              Mariners transmitted on Channel 16 of interest to VTS participants. 
  
      6.  Personnel .  The Coast Guard has staffed its VTC's with personnel who serve 
          in watch sections on an around-the-clock basis.  Personnel may be 
          military, civilian, or a combination of both.  Each VTS is staffed with 
          sufficient personnel to staff each watch position assigned in the VTC on a 
 
  
  
  4.G.7.(1)        (a)  Transits .  Vessel movements into or out of the VTS area or 
                        vessels moving through the VTS area without breaking their 
                        voyage within the VTS area. 
  
############
                   (b)  Intra-VTS Transits .  Vessel movements from anchorage outside 
                        a port area to berth, or the reverse; or movements from one                         port area to another port area within a VTS's given area of                         responsibility.  An example of an intra-VTS transit would be                         a vessel movement from Seattle to Tacoma.  This is a                         movement from one distinct port to another in the VTS area.   
                   (c)  Port Movements
.  Vessel movements solely within the 
                        geographic confines of one port area within a VTS area. 
                (2)  Participation Rate
.  See definition in subparagraph 4.G.2.b above. 
  
              (3)  Secondary Functions .  Information dealing with associated 
                   functions performed in support of other Coast Guard programs, and 
                   in support of federal and non-federal government agencies. 
  
              (4)  Equipment Status .  Information gathered to monitor VTS equipment 
                   in relation to the VTS Program availability standard.  A minimum 
                   percentage of on-air time is required for radars, television, 
                   relay systems, VHF-FM communications, and data processing 
                   systems. 
  
              (5)  Casualty Data .  A short description of all collisions, rammings, 
                   and groundings in a VTS area. 
  
          b.  Subjective Data .  In addition to the standardized statistical data, 
              subjective data is also required.  Information on "near misses," 
              instances where more sophisticated VTS equipment or procedures may 
              have helped prevent a casualty, and other instances that in the 
              opinion of the VTS CO may help support the VTS program, should also be 
              included in the quarterly report. 
  
          c.  Reporting Requirements .  The statistical and subjective data will be 
              gathered and reported on a quarterly basis to Commandant (G-WWM) 
              within 30 days of the end of the quarter.  The statistics may be 
              transmitted by electronic means to be used in development of the VTS 
              National Data Base.  VTS units will be allowed access to this data 
              base on request.  The statistical categories and parameters will be 
              reviewed for adjustment on a yearly basis.  The revisions will be 
              provided to each VTS one quarter before any change is required.  This 
              system is designed to allow free exchange of statistical data between 
              Headquarters, districts, and VTS units. 
  
      8.  VTS Support Of Other Coast Guard And Government Activities .  The primary 
          goal of the VTS Program is to prevent vessel collisions, rammings, and 
          groundings.  The VTS, however, is capable of performing numerous other 
          functions in support of other Coast Guard and government activities. 
          While this support is encouraged, district commanders should carefully 
 
  
  
  4.G.8.  (cont'd)  consider the impact of these operations on vessel safety in the 
          VTS area.  During the planning process for new or replacement equipment, 
          district commanders should consider equipment needs for these other 
          activities which may exceed those necessary to carry out VTS 
          responsibilities.  Additional capabilities are more efficiently included 
          as part of a routine equipment replacement rather than retrofitting after 
          the fact. 
  
          a.  Maritime Defense Zone (MDZ) .  VTS's have the capabilities to perform 
              several tasks relative to mobilization.  Each VTS is, or will be, 
              equipped with extensive surveillance capabilities including radar and 
 
  
                      CHAPTER 5.  CONTROL OF OCEAN DUMPING 
  
                                 CONTENTS 
  
  SECTION                                                              PAGE 
  
  5.A.          Ocean Dumping Authority                                5-1 
  
############
  5.B.          Federal Responsibilities                               5-1 
  
  5.C.          Ocean Dumping Permits                                  5-1 
  5.C.1.            General Permits                                    5-1 
  5.C.2.            Special Permits                                    5-1 
  5.C.3.            Statements Of Findings                             5-2 
  
  5.D.          Review Of Permit Applications                          5-2 
  
  5.E.          Surveillance Of Ocean Dumping                          5-2 
  5.E.1.             Surveillance                                      5-2 
  5.E.1.a.               Program Oversight                             5-2 
  5.E.1.b.               Scope Of Coast Guard Activities               5-2 
  5.E.1.c.               Surveillance Methods                          5-3 
  5.E.1.d.               Surveillance By Shipriders                    5-3 
  5.E.1.d.(1)                 General                                  5-3 
  5.E.1.d.(2)                 Shiprider Duties                         5-3 
  5.E.1.e.               Vessel Boardings                              5-3 
  5.E.1.f.               Sampling Guidelines                           5-4 
  5.E.1.f.(1)                 General                                  5-4 
  5.E.1.f.(2)                 Interagency Coordination                 5-4 
  5.E.2.             Monitoring Of Ocean Dump Sites                    5-4 
  
  5.F.          Ocean Dumping Enforcement                              5-5 
  5.F.1.             Recording Ocean Dumpings                          5-5 
  5.F.2.             Reports Of Violations                             5-5 
  5.F.2.a.               Documentation Of Alleged Violations           5-5 
  5.F.2.b.               Operational Waste Disposal                    5-5 
  5.F.3.             Quarterly Ocean Dumping Reports                   5-6 
  5.F.4.             Interagency Agreements                            5-6 
 
  
  CHAPTER 5.  CONTROL OF OCEAN DUMPING 
  
  A.  Ocean Dumping Authority .  Title I of the Marine Protection, Research, and 
      Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (MPRSA), 33 U.S.C. 1401 et seq., prohibits, with 
      certain exceptions, the dumping or transportation for dumping of "materials" 
      into ocean waters without a permit.  MPRSA, as amended, implements the 
      Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and 
      Other Matter of 1972, referred to as the London Dumping Convention, to which 
      the U.S. is a party. 
  
  B.  Federal Responsibilities .  The Ocean Dumping Program is primarily the 
      responsibility of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which issues 
      permits for ocean disposal.  EPA regulations for ocean dumping are in 40 CFR 
      220 et seq.  Permits for the dumping of dredged materials are issued by the 
      U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).  USACE regulations related to dredging 
      and dumping are found in 33 CFR 323 for discharges or dredged or fill material 
      into waters of the U.S., and 33 CFR 324 for ocean dumping of dredged 
      material.  Federal projects involving disposal of dredged material are covered 
      by 33 CFR 209.145.  Section 107(c) of the MPRSA, 33 U.S.C. 1417(c), assigns to 
      the Secretary of the Department in which Coast Guard is operating 
      responsibility for surveillance and other enforcement activities to prevent 
      unlawful dumping or transportation of materials for dumping.  This 
      responsibility has been delegated to the Commandant under 49 CFR 1.46(n)(5). 
  
  C.  Ocean Dumping Permits . 
  
      1.  General Permits .  General permits are authorized by the Administrator of 
          the EPA for materials that are determined to have a minimal environmental 
          impact; that is, for nontoxic materials generally disposed of in small 
          quantities (see 40 CFR 221 and 229).  Examples of general permits include 
          those issued for burials at sea, the sinking of U.S. Navy target vessels, 
          and the disposal of vessels in the ocean.  General permits are published 
          in the Federal Register; they specify the types and amounts of materials 
          which may be dumped, the designated dump areas, and other conditions 
          deemed appropriate by the EPA.  These permits are valid for an indefinite 
          period of time. 
  
      2.  Special Permits .  Special permits are issued to specific applicants and 
          have fixed expiration dates.  Any person desiring to dump material (with 
          the exception of fish wastes in certain areas and any materials covered by 
          a general permit) or to transport material from the U.S. for ocean dumping 
          must first obtain a special permit from the EPA or USACE, as specified in 
          the MPRSA.  Emergency, interim, and research permits are variations of 
          special permits.  Permit categories are defined in EPA's Ocean Dumping 
          Regulations (40 CFR 220.2).  A special permit may be issued to an 
          applicant after evaluation of the need, the effect on the environment, and 
          alternative disposal methods.  Permits will specify the type and quantity 
          of material authorized to be dumped, the site, disposal criteria such as 
          the distance to be traversed during the discharge, the permit expiration 
          date, and other appropriate conditions.  Approved dump sites are listed in 
          EPA's Ocean Dumping Regulations (40 CFR 228). 
 
############
  
  
  5.C.3.  Statements Of Findings .  Statements of Findings are issued by the USACE to 
          authorize ocean dumping of dredged material associated with federal 
          navigation projects.  These activities may be conducted by either USACE or 
          contract vessels. 
  
  D.  Review Of Permit Applications .  EPA and USACE regulations require copies of 
      public notices regarding ocean dumping applications to be forwarded to the 
      appropriate Coast Guard district.  The district commander will review the 
      notices, and may request the imposition of additional provisions/conditions on 
      the permit, to facilitate surveillance and enforcement activities.  Examples 
      of such conditions are:  use of specific navigation techniques, forwarding of 
      certain vessel logs or records to the Coast Guard, requirement to communicate 
      vessel movement and activities, shiprider requirements, and restrictions of 
      nighttime operations. 
  
  E.  Surveillance Of Ocean Dumping . 
  
      1.  Surveillance .  For the purposes of implementing the MPRSA, "surveillance" 
          includes all activities necessary to ensure that ocean dumping is in 
          accordance with the requirements of the MPRSA and other appropriate laws 
          and regulations, and with the terms of the permit issued pursuant to the 
          act. 
  
          a.  Program Oversight .  District commanders shall issue appropriate 
              guidance to field units directly engaged in ocean dumping 
              surveillance, specifying the location and-primary use of active dump 
              sites and other guidance as necessary.  The EPA provides Coast Guard 
              units directly engaged in surveillance and enforcement with copies of 
              permits and Statements of Findings for their area of operation. 
              Tabular summaries containing vessel name, authorized materials, dump 
              site location, expiration date, dispersal rates, and other appropriate 
              information may be substituted in lieu of actual permits. 
  
          b.  Scope Of Coast Guard Activities .  Coast Guard surveillance activities 
              include:  checking the validity of permits; verifying vessel logs, 
              permits, and waste documentation; obtaining radio reports of dump 
              vessel position and activity; observing transportation routes and 
              disposal sites; escorting or riding of dump vessels; monitoring 
              dumping activities; and utilizing electronic methods such as radar. 
              The degree of Coast Guard involvement will depend upon the type(s) of 
              material dumped.  "Surveillance" of ocean dumping is not restricted to 
              dedicated observations, to specific ocean disposal activities, or to a 
              designated dump site.  Any Coast Guard unit that observes a suspected 
              violation shall report it to the district commander (m) for 
              evaluation/investigation.  The dump vessel's movements to and from the 
              site are of equal and possibly greater concern.  Random surveillance 
              should be conducted to discourage illegal dumping, dumping without a 
              permit, dumping not in accordance with valid permits, or dumping at 
              other than the sites authorized on the permits.  No dedicated 
              surveillance missions are presently anticipated for the enforcement of 
              general permits. 
 
  
  5.E.1.  c.  Surveillance Methods .  Surveillance will be accomplished utilizing one 
              of the following methods, based on practicality and resource 
              availability: 
  
              (1)  Assignment of a vessel/aircraft to rendezvous with the 
                   transporting vessel at the dump site, or escort the vessel to the 
                   dump site; 
  
              (2)  Surveillance of dump vessel routes or dump sites by 
                   vessel/aircraft in response to specific or frequent disposal 
                   activity; 
  
              (3)  Assignment of a shiprider to ride the dump vessel to the dump 
                   site; 
  
############
              (4)  On-site boarding of vessels; 
  
              (5)  Radar coverage of the dump site; or 
  
              (6)  Other electronic means which may be developed. 
  
          d.  Surveillance By Shipriders . 
  
              (1)  General.  Shipriders are generally a more effective means of 
                   surveillance, particularly when night dumping is authorized or 
                   when distant dump sites are used.  Shipriders are Coast Guard 
                   officers or petty officers who act as observers of dumping 
                   activities.  They neither make changes to the provisions of the 
                   dumping permits nor direct the actions of the permittee in any 
                   way.  They may, however, explain applicable provisions of the 
                   permit and the regulations.  A shiprider must have a working 
                   knowledge of the Ocean Dumping Program, specific knowledge of the 
                   provisions of the permit, and the ability to verify the dump 
                   location utilizing the vessel's navigation equipment.  While 
                   aboard for a dumping mission, the shiprider receives quarters and 
                   subsistence from the permittee. 
  
              (2)  Shiprider Duties .  Prior to departure, the shiprider shall verify 
                   the presence of a valid permit and, if requested by EPA, oversee 
                   the drawing of a sample of the material to be dumped.  The 
                   shiprider will confer with the vessel operator, explain the 
                   surveillance mission and the navigational requirements, and 
                   become familiar with the vessel's capabilities and procedures to 
                   comply with required dispersal rates.  Dispersal rates are 
                   specified for most materials.  Dispersal rates can be computed 
                   through such factors as load volume/weight, actual discharge 
                   time, and vessel speed.  Failure to meet the stipulated dispersal 
                   rate shall be reported as a violation, regardless of other 
                   compliance with the permit conditions. 
  
          e.  Vessel Boardings .  Dump vessels will be boarded to examine:  permits, 
              waste manifests, and waste composition reports; navigational 
              equipment, ocean dumping logs, and pollution prevention equipment; and 
 
  
  5.E.1.  e.  (cont'd) vessel logs and records in accordance with Commandant 
              Instructions (COMDTINST's) 5010.8 Series and M16250.26.  Boardings 
              will normally be conducted in port and can be combined with other 
              activities, such as shiprider missions and obtaining dump material 
              samples. 
  
          f.  Sampling Guidelines . 
  
              (1)  General.  All materials, other than those not requiring permits, 
                   those prohibited from dumping, those disposed of under general 
                   permits, and dredged materials authorized under a USACE State of 
                   Findings, except in the New York and San Francisco areas, are 
                   defined herein as Category "B" materials.  Some permits for 
                   Category "B" dumping activities require an analysis of a 
                   representative sample of each individual load.  Other permits call 
                   for analysis at intervals ranging from monthly to semiannually, 
                   depending on the specific permit.  Since the majority of permits 
                   authorize the mixing of materials destined for the same disposal 
                   site, the EPA has, in most areas, established a program of spot 
                   sampling of the materials under individual permits, prior to 
                   mixing.  This sampling effort is frequently conducted of 
                   individual tank truckloads prior to loading into the shoreside 
                   holding tank at the port of departure. 
  
              (2)  Interagency Coordination .  The district commander should confer 
                   with the EPA regional administrator and, where the EPA has 
                   established a sampling program, develop practical procedures for 
                   Coast Guard officials to assist in this effort.  Such procedures 
                   normally call for the sample to be drawn by facility personnel, in 
                   the presence of a Coast Guard official, and presented to that 
                   official properly packaged and documented.  Additional 
                   coordination factors include certification of the samples, means 
                   of delivering samples to the appropriate laboratory for analysis, 
                   and special permit conditions that might be required.  This 
                   sampling program is limited to EPA permitted damping of non- 
                   containerized wastes.  Coast Guard personnel shall not draw 
                   samples. 
  
############
      2.  Monitoring Of Ocean Dump Sites .  For the purpose of implementing the 
          MPRSA, "monitoring" includes the collection of data to determine long and 
 
  
  
FIGURE 5-2 (cont'd) 
  
  The COE will direct the surveillance effort over COE contract dumpers engaged in 
  ocean disposal activities. 
  
  The COE will conduct surveillance over COE contract dumpers engaged in ocean 
  disposal activities and may augment this effort with available USCG resources. 
  
  The USCG will continue its surveillance efforts over COE contract barges engaged 
  in ocean dumping in New York and San Francisco areas. 
  
  To facilitate optimum scheduling, the COE will notify the USCG in a timely manner 
  of the COE's desires for specific surveillance missions.  Requests will identify 
  the geographical area, time of surveillance, and other specifics as may be needed 
  to conduct an effective surveillance operation. 
  
  The USCG will, operations permitting, respond to requests from the COE for 
  surveillance missions to oversee specific COE contract dumping activity. 
  
  The USCG will notify the COE of the results of any specifically requested 
  surveillance missions. 
  
  While engaged in its various mission activities, the USCG will continue to be on 
  the alert for suspicious ocean dumping operations. 
  
  ARTICLE V - BUDGETARY RESPONSIBILITIES  
  
  Each agency will fund all costs it incurs under this Agreement.  Additionally, 
  agreements that involve fund reimbursement in connection with specific activities 
  may be entered into before the activity is undertaken. 
  
  ARTICLE VI - AMENDMENTS  
  
  This Agreement may be amended from time to time as may be mutually agreeable to 
  the parties thereto. 
  
  ARTICLE VII - TERMINATION  
  
  This Agreement may be terminated by either party upon 60 days advance written 
  notice thereof to the other party. 
  
  Done this Seventh day of September, 1976, at the City of Washington. 
  
  For the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers:  For the U. S. Coast Guard: 
  
              Signed by:                  Signed by: 
              ERNEST GRAVES               ROBERT H. SCARBOROUGH 
              MG, U. S. ARMY              RADM, U. S. COAST GUARD 
              DIRECTOR OF CIVIL WORKS     CHIEF OF STAFF 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 6.  CONTINGENCY PLANNING FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  
  SECTION                                                                  PAGE 
  
  6.A.          National Emergency Response Planning                        6-1 
  6.A.1.            Authority                                               6-1 
  6.A.2.            Plan Development                                        6-1 
  6.A.3.            Required Plans                                          6-1 
  
  6.B.          Regional/Local Contingency Planning                         6-2 
  6.B.1.            Introduction                                            6-2 
  6.B.2.            Basic Planning For Pollution Response                   6-2 
  6.B.2.a.              Introduction                                        6-2 
  6.B.2.b.              Content For RCP's                                   6-2 
  6.B.2.c.              Format For RCP's                                    6-3 
  6.B.2.d.              Content For LCP'S                                   6-3 
  6.B.2.e.              Format For LCP's                                    6-6 
  6.B.2.f.              Coast Guard Involvement In Other Contingency 
                        Planning Efforts                                    6-6 
  6.B.2.f.(1)               Review Of Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) 
                            Contingency Plans                               6-6 
  6.B.2.f.(2)               Planning Guidelines                             6-9 
  6.B.2.f.(2)(a)                Risk Analysis                               6-9 
  6.B.2.f.(2)(b)                Recovery Equipment                          6-9 
  6.B.2.f.(2)(c)                Equipment Availability                      6-9 
  6.B.2.f.(2)(d)                Response Time                               6-10 
  6.B.2.f.(2)(e)                Drills                                      6-10 
  6.B.2.f.(2)(f)                Support Vessels                             6-10 
  6.B.2.f.(2)(g)                Dispersant Equipment                        6-10 
  6.B.2.f.(3)               Review Of Incinerator Ship Contingency Plans    6-11 
  6.B.3.            Hazardous Materials Operations                          6-11 
  6.B.3.a.              Introduction                                        6-11 
  6.B.3.b.              Coast Guard Response                                6-11 
  6.B.3.c.              Plan Administration                                 6-12 
  6.B.3.d.              Access To Information                               6-12 
  6.B.4.            Planning For Vessel And Waterfront Fires                6-12 
  6.B.5.            Planning For Natural Disaster Response                  6-13 
  6.B.6.            Planning For Response To Civil Disorder And Terrorism   6-13 
  6.B.7.            Recovery Of Foreign Military Materiel                   6-13 
  
  6.C.          Port Emergency Planning                                     6-13 
  6.C.1.            Port Planning Committees                                6-13 
  6.C.1.a.              Planning Features                                   6-13 
  6.C.1.b.              Planning Guidelines                                 6-14 
  6.C.1.c.              Federal Involvement                                 6-14 
  6.C.2.            Program Goals                                           6-14 
  6.C.3.            MARAD Responsibilities In Port Emergencies              6-14 
  6.C.4.            Operation And Control Of Port Facilities                6-16 
 
############
  
  
  CHAPTER 6.  CONTINGENCY PLANNING FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
  
  A.  National Emergency Response Planning . 
  
      1.  Authority .  Much of the Coast Guard's authority for prevention, 
          enforcement, and response to discharges of oil and hazardous substances, 
          the general safety of our ports and waterways, and the transportation of 
          hazardous materials has been delegated by the Secretary of the Department 
          of Transportation (SECDOT). 
  
      2.  Plan Development .  With this authority comes the responsibility for the 
          captain of the port (COTP) to make decisions affecting the safety and 
          security of vessels, waterfront facilities, or the environment. 
          Consideration must be given to additional liabilities or responsibilities 
          which the Coast Guard may incur as a result of response activities.  For 
          example, a decision to allow a vessel which is afire or flooding to enter 
          port, subject to certain conditions, requires the COTP to ensure 
          conditions for entry are met.  If they are not met, or if activities 
          adversely affect the safety of the vessel, or a waterfront facility or the 
          environment, the COTP must ensure that positive, adequate action is taken 
          to resolve the situation.  The COTP should carefully evaluate the 
          capabilities of involved parties (including the Coast Guard) to perform 
          required tasks before making response decisions, and closely monitor 
          response activities during their critical stages.  For further 
          information, see volume VII (TO BE DEVELOPED) of this manual. 
  
      3.  Required Plans .  A COTP should have plans for emergencies which fall into 
          two categories:  those having a relatively high probability of occurring 
          (e.g., an oil spill); and those which, while having a low probability of 
          occurring, would cause a high level of damage to persons or property 
          (e.g., liquefied natural gas (LNG) in a port which handles LNG vessels). 
          COTP's should have the following plans: 
  
          a.  Oil and hazardous substance spill response (see 40 CFR 300); 
  
          b.  Maritime counter-terrorism (see volume VII (TO BE DEVELOPED) of this 
              manual); 
  
          c.  Vessel and waterfront fire (see chapter 8 of this volume); 
  
          d.  Natural disaster (see Natural Disaster Preparedness Plan (NDPP), 
 
  
  
  6.A.3.  (cont'd) include the vessel and waterfront fires response plan.  Examples 
          of locally-required plans include LNG, aircraft crash, and vessel 
          collision and/or grounding.  COTP's may also write operation orders 
          (OPORDER's) in response to a specific incident for a specific time period 
          (see volume VII (TO BE DEVELOPED) of this manual).  OPORDER examples 
          include seasonal icebreaking operations and arrival of nuclear submarines. 
  B.  Regional/Local Contingency Planning . 
  
      1.  Introduction .  A contingency plan enables decision makers to take 
          expeditious and predictable  actions to prevent or mitigate potentially 
          disastrous conditions.  Contingency planning does not replace good 
          judgement and experience in an emergency; however, it augments those 
          qualities significantly.  It allows the COTP to use efficiently all 
          readily available resources and authorities to counter or avoid 
          potentially severe threats to the safety and security of port operations. 
          Such plans should contain valuable information or procedures that may not 
          be immediately apparent, such as: 
  
          a.  Operational and inspection procedures for such activities as transits 
              of vessels carrying LNG and cargo transfer operations; 
  
############
          b.  Agencies and organizations to notify or to provide assistance during 
              an incident (e.g., assistance from pilot associations would be 
              critical in situations requiring vessel movements); 
  
          c.  Background information on waterfront facilities and vulnerable 
              resources (maps showing facility characteristics, listings of 24-hour 
              phone numbers, key personnel); and 
  
          d.  Contacts in other federal, state, and local authorities, and the media. 
  
      2.  Basic Planning For Pollution Response . 
  
          a.  Introduction .  The need for the development of comprehensive federal 
              regional contingency plans (RCP's) has been recognized for some time. 
              As experience was gained concerning the effectiveness of these plans, 
              it was realized that more detailed planning was required at the local 
              level to facilitate successful pollution response operations.  The 
              result was the establishment of a requirement for the development of 
              federal local contingency plans (LCP's) by each Coast Guard 
              predesignated on-scene coordinator (OSC).  The detailed LCP's, 
              containing specific information on the local response resources, 
              response organization, and other considerations are supported by a 
              more general RCP.  The RCP provides guidance on how an OSC can obtain 
              assistance from within the region for those incidents beyond the 
              capability of an LCP. 
  
          b.  Content For RCP's .  Section 300.42 of the National Contingency Plan 
              (NCP) requires that an RCP be developed and maintained for each 
              standard federal region, Alaska, and the Caribbean.  As co-chairperson 
              of the standing Regional Response Team (RRT), the district (m) officer 
 
  
  
  6.B.2.  b.  (cont'd) is responsible for coordinating Coast Guard input to the 
              RCP.  RCP's should be more than a simple reiteration of what is stated 
              in the NCP.  The content of an RCP is intended to implement the NCP 
              within a region and accomplish all of the coordination necessary for 
              an effective multi-organizational response effort in support of the 
              region's OSC's.  Particular attention should be paid to including 
              information on those types of services that an OSC typically requests               from an RRT, such as:   
              (1)  Assistance in locating appropriate disposal sites. 
  
              (2)  Access to barges and other vessels for response-related salvage 
                   operations. 
  
              (3)  Assistance in making environmental damage assessments. 
  
              (4)  Access to aircraft or trucks with a heavy lift capability. 
  
              (5)  Coordination of waterfowl conservation efforts. 
  
              (6)  Identification and prioritization of natural resources requiring 
                   protection. 
  
              (7)  Provision of forecasting services, including weather, currents, 
                   and pollutant movement predictions. 
  
              The information in an RCP should also be coordinated with any existing 
              state contingency plans and federal LCP's. 
  
          c.  Format For RCP's .  Although the format for RCP's is not as important 
              as the content, it is recognized that there is a need for uniformity 
              in format among the various plans.  Because the responsibility for 
              developing these plans is jointly shared by the Environmental 
              Protection Agency (EPA) and the Coast Guard, section 300.42 indicates 
              that RRT's will follow the format of the NCP to the greatest extent 
              possible. 
  
          d.  Content For LCP's .  Section 300.43 of the NCP requires that a federal 
              LCP be developed for each area where the Coast Guard acts as the 
              predesignated OSC.  Detailed, extensive contingency planning by each 
              OSC is considered essential for well-coordinated responses to 
              pollution incidents. 
  
############
              (1)  The main objectives of an LCP should be to: 
  
                   (a)  Identify, through a hazard analysis, probable locations of 
                        discharges or releases. 
  
                   (b)  Develop effective systems for discovering and reporting 
                        pollution incidents. 
 
  
  
  6.B.2.d.(1)      (c)  Institute prompt and effective actions to restrict the 
                        spread of pollutants. 
  
                   (d)  Ensure that the public health and welfare are adequately 
                        protected. 
  
                   (e)  Minimize damage to wildlife and the environment from oil and 
                        hazardous substance incidents. 
  
                   (f)  Provide techniques for removal and locations for the 
                        disposal of collected pollutants. 
  
                   (g)  Identify government, commercial, and industry resources 
                        capable of responding to pollution incidents and lending 
                        expertise to the OSC in specific areas (e.g., analytical 
                        support, medical expertise, evacuation, cleanup methods). 
  
                   (h)  Identify available equipment for removal operations and 
                        logistical support. 
  
                   (i)  Identify procedures for initiating actions for the recovery 
                        of cleanup costs and performance of enforcement actions as 
                        necessary. 
  
              (2)  The first step in accomplishing these objectives in an LCP is to 
                   identify potential sources of spills within the OSC's zone.  This 
                   can be done by determining what types of products are produced, 
                   used, stored, or transported in the area; examining historical 
                   spill data; and by locating, as a minimum: 
  
                   (a)  High density vessel traffic areas. 
  
                   (b)  Restricted navigational areas (RNA's). 
  
                   (c)  Hazards to navigation. 
  
                   (d)  Waterfront facilities. 
  
                   (e)  Storage facilities. 
  
                   (f)  Production facilities. 
  
                   (g)  Pipelines. 
  
                   (h)  Refineries and processing plants. 
  
                   (i)  Outfalls, municipal sewers, and storm drains. 
  
                   (j)  Railways and highways within the OSC's zone. 
  
                   This information, coupled with a review of local meteorological 
                   conditions, winds, waves, tides, oceanographic patterns, and 
 
  
 
   
  6.B.2.d.    (2)  (cont'd)  other related parameters will enable an OSC to 
                   determine potential sources and the most likely places of 
                   occurrence for spills. 
  
              (3)  The next step is to develop estimates of the size of the areas 
                   that would be affected by "worst case" incidents, as well as 
                   those more commonly encountered.  This may be accomplished in a 
                   number of ways.  Manual III of the Chemical Hazardous Response 
                   Information System (CHRIS), the Hazard Assessment Handbook, 
                   Commandant Instruction (COMDTINST) M16465.13, and the pollutant 
                   spill trajectory forecasting service available through the Coast 
                   Guard National Response Center may prove useful.  In assessing 
                   these hazards, the OSC should take into account factors such as 
                   the volatility, reactivity, toxicity of the material and the 
                   proximity to populated or environmentally sensitive areas. 
  
              (4)  Once this is completed, it is necessary to identify those public 
                   health and environmental resources that would be threatened, and 
                   to what extent they would be jeopardized, should one of the 
                   possible incidents occur.  A survey of each potentially 
                   threatened are is required to identify high public health risks 
                   such as heavily populated areas, schools, and hospitals; and 
                   environmentally sensitive resources such as marine sanctuaries, 
                   estuaries, mangroves, wildlife concentration areas, beaches, and 
                   water intakes. 
  
              (5)  The information assembled to this point has: 
  
                   (a)  Established potential sources of spills. 
  
                   (b)  Identified where the incidents are most likely to occur. 
  
                   (c)  Estimated the the size of the areas which would be affected 
                        for a worst case situation and the more likely types of 
                        incidents that may happen. 
  
############
                   (d)  Identified the types of public health and environmental 
                        hazards that would result. 
  
              (6)  Once this is completed, the unit may want to develop action plans 
                   for high risk areas or for certain chemicals.  These action plans 
                   should cover the characteristics and hazards of the material, 
                   potential sources of spills, likely or worst case spill 
                   scenarios, areas at risk, and response actions to be carried out. 
  
              (7)  The final step is the development of a data base of response 
                   resources available to the OSC.  It is considered most important 
                   for each OSC to periodically meet with any persons or 
                   organizations which might provide assistance during a spill. 
                   This will allow the OSC to better ascertain/update what type and 
                   amount of assistance can be reasonably expected.  It will also 
                   help to establish a rapport with other response organizations, 
 
  
  
  6.B.2.d.    (7)  (cont'd)  which should prove most helpful during an actual 
                   incident.  In addition to inventories of equipment and contact 
                   point listings, the logistical considerations of utilizing these 
                   resources should be addressed.  For example, it is necessary to 
                   establish an effective communications plan for use during 
                   pollution incidents.  Suggested methods for collecting 
                   information for the LCP may be found in COMDTINST M16466.1, A 
                   Suggested Development Plan for A Regional Contingency Plan Data 
                   Base. 
  
              (8)  It is also essential that the LCP be coordinated with any state, 
                   local, or industry contingency plans that exist within the OSC's 
                   zone.  This intergovernmental coordination is an essential 
                   element of the contingency planning process. 
  
          e.  Format For LCP's .  For purposes of uniformity, it is desired that the 
              following format be utilized for all LCP's.  Sections in the format 
              which are not applicable can be omitted, but the associated number 
              should be reserved for future use.  If additional sections are 
              required, they should be added to the appropriate part using the next 
              sequential number to identify the topic.  The suggested format is 
              shown in Figure 6-1. 
  
          f.  Coast Guard Involvement In Other Contingency Planning Efforts . 
  
              (1)  Review Of Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Contingency Plans .  A 
                   Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) requires the Coast Guard to 
                   determine the adequacy of oil spill contingency plans submitted 
                   to the Minerals Management Service (MMS) as part of OCS 
                   Exploration Plans or Development and Production Plans.  The OSC 
                   for the zone in which the drilling activity will occur is 
                   responsible for conducting this review.  A regional Technical 
                   Review Board (TRB) will assist OSC's in determining the adequacy 
                   of these contingency plans.  Specifically, the TRB will: 
  
                   (a)  Advise the OSC on whether response equipment proposed in the 
                        contingency plan meets currently accepted state-of-the-art 
                        criteria. 
  
                   (b)  Advise the OSC on the adequacy of the amounts and types of 
                        equipment proposed. 
  
                   (c)  Advise the OSC on acceptable response times for local 
                        conditions. 
  
                   (d)  Keep abreast of developments in response equipment 
                        technology and revise state-of-the-art criteria accordingly. 
  
                   (e)  Provide OSC's with technical information on equipment 
                        proposed by operators. 
 
  
  
                                 FIGURE 6-1 
  
                    SUGGESTED FORMAT FOR LOCAL POLLUTION CONTINGENCY PLANS 
  
      Emergency Response Notification Summary 
  
      Letter of Promulgation 
  
      Record of Amendments 
  
############
      Table of Contents 
  
      List of Effective Pages 
  
          100.  Introduction  
  
              101.     Authority 
              102.     Purpose and Objectives 
              103.     Scope 
              104.     Abbreviations 
              105.     Definitions 
  
          200.  Policy And Responsibility  
  
              201.     Federal Policy 
              202.     Related State or Local Policy 
              203.     Multi-National Policy 
              204.     OSC Responsibility 
              205.     Non-Federal Responsibility 
  
          300.  Planning And Response Considerations  
  
              301.     Oil and Hazardous Substance Transportation Pattern 
              302.     Transfer, Storage, and Processing Facilities 
              303.     Historical Spill Considerations 
              304.     Hydrological and Climatological Considerations 
              305.     Local Geography 
              306.     Highly Vulnerable Resources 
              307.     Local Response Resources 
              308.     Coordination With Other Contingency Plans 
  
          400.  Response Organization  
  
          500.  Operational Response Actions  
  
          600.  Coordinating Instructions  
  
              601.     Delegation of Authority 
              602.     Notification 
              603.     Coordination With Special Forces 
              604.     Termination of Response Activities 
              605.     Resolution of Disputes 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 6-1 (cont'd) 
  
          700.  Procedures For Reviewing And Updating The Local Contingency Plan  
  
          Annex I      1100 Distribution 
          Annex II     1200 Pollution Response Bill 
          Annex III    1300 Geographic Boundaries 
          Annex IV     1400 Notification, Communications, and Reports 
          Annex V      1500 Public Information 
          Annex VI     1600 Documentation for Enforcement and Cost Recovery 
          Annex VII    1700 Funding 
          Annex VIII   1800 Cleanup Techniques and Policies 
          Annex IX     1900 Arrangements for Non-Federal Groups 
          Annex X      2000 Interagency and Intergovernmental Support 
          Annex XI     2500 Geographic/Action Directory 
          Annex XII    2600 Response/Assistance Directory 
 
  
  6.B.2.f.    (1)  (cont'd)  The membership of the TRB includes:  Coast Guard 
                   district commander representative (co-chairperson), MMS Deputy 
                   Minerals Manager representative (co-chairperson), appropriate 
                   Coast Guard National Strike Force (NSF) commanding officer (CO), 
                   EPA Oil and Hazardous Materials Simulated Environmental Testing 
                   Tank (OHMSETT) representative, Coast Guard Headquarters Marine 
                   Technology Division (Commandant G-DMT) representative, Coast 
                   Guard Headquarters Environmental Response Division (Commandant 
 
  
  
  6.B.2.f.(2)      (c)  (cont'd)  would be utilized in concert with each other.  The 
                        contingency plan should also indicate how additional 
                        equipment will be made available for extraordinary spills 
                        (i.e., spills that exceed the recovery capacity of the 
                        readily available equipment). 
  
                   (d)  Response Time .  If local conditions or geography permit, the 
                        target for initiating recovery operations with pre-staged 
                        equipment (i.e., the response time) should be 6 to 12 hours 
                        from the time of the spill dependent upon the location and 
                        general operating characteristics of the drilling or 
                        production activity.  Whatever amount of equipment is 
                        required to be available for responding to spills should be 
                        fully deployed and in operation within the specified 
                        response time, weather permitting.  The location of staged 
                        equipment will be left to the operator.  For extraordinary 
                        spills, the operator should be expected to obtain additional 
                        equipment within 48 hours. 
  
                   (e)  Drills.  Response exercises for deploying equipment in open 
                        water shall occur at least annually to test the equipment 
                        and the contingency plan.  This exercise should be held 
                        under realistic environmental conditions in which deployment 
                        and operation can be accomplished without endangering the 
                        safety of personnel.  In addition, at least one hands-on 
                        drill should be conducted annually as part of a training 
                        program and may include full deployment conducted in 
                        protected waters.  Exercises that test the alerting/initial 
                        response mechanism and command, control, and communications 
                        should be held as frequently as necessary to demonstrate 
                        effectiveness to the OSC. 
  
                   (f)  Support Vessels .  Vessels or vessel types to be used in 
                        deploying and operating the response equipment should be 
                        identified in the contingency plan.  The vessels should be 
                        available within the same response time parameters as used 
                        for response equipment.  The crews of all candidate support 
                        vessels should be familiar with equipment deployment and 
                        operating techniques; or a system should be developed to 
                        supply trained crews/supervisors to the support vessels 
                        within the specified response time. 
  
############
                   (g)  Dispersant Equipment .  In addition to oil recovery 
                        equipment, dispersant equipment should be included in the 
                        contingency plan.  Equipment capable of applying dispersants 
                        should be maintained at appropriate staging points as well 
                        as adequate stockpiles of dispersants if they are not 
                        readily available from local distributors.  The types and 
                        toxicities of dispersants proposed for use should be 
                        identified in the contingency plan.  The quantity and types 
                        of dispersants presited should be related to the risk 
                        analysis, taking into account dispersant toxicity, oil 
 
  
  
  6.B.2.f.(2)      (g)  (cont'd)  composition, and water temperature.  The above 
                        should not be interpreted as a predilection on the part of 
                        government for the use of dispersants, but a recognition 
                        that spills may occur when, due to environmental conditions 
                        or lack of adequate support resources, mechanical recovery 
                        is not possible.  The decision to use dispersants would of 
                        course be made using the criteria and procedures set forth 
                        in Subpart H of the NCP.  A response target of 24 hours from 
                        the time the spill occurs is appropriate, unless 
 
  
  
  6.B.3.  b.  (cont'd)  local, state, or federal agencies.  In the event of an 
              incident involving hazardous materials affecting a vessel, a port, or 
              the environment, the Coast Guard undoubtedly will become involved.  To 
              ensure the most effective Coast Guard response to hazardous materials 
              incidents, coordinated plans of action must be formulated in advance. 
              Authority for development of such plans may be found in various 
              federal laws, including the Ports and Waterways Safety Act (PWSA), the 
              Federal Water Pollution Control Act (FWPCA), the Hazardous Materials 
              Transportation Act (HMTA), and the Comprehensive Environmental 
              Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA).  The 
              effectiveness of a hazardous materials incident resolution depends 
              upon the severity of the incident, the type(s) of materials involved, 
              the location of the incident, and the degree of preparedness of the 
              responding agencies.  The locations of facilities handling hazardous 
              materials and their relation to other facilities, industry and 
              residential sections in the proximate area are particularly important 
              factors in planning.  Additional considerations may involve 
              operational constraints on vessels and facilities handling hazardous 
              or foreign materials.  For further information, see volume VII (TO BE 
              DEVELOPED) of this manual. 
  
          c.  Plan Administration .  Support agreements should be made with various 
              federal, state, and local agencies, including as a minimum: 
  
              (1)  Port authorities; 
  
              (2)  Fire departments; 
  
              (3)  Police departments; 
  
              (4)  Industry personnel knowledgeable in the hazardous materials 
                   handled in the port, and having equipment that may be used in 
                   control and recovery; and 
  
              (5)  Active duty and reserve components of military units in the area. 
  
          d.  Access To Information .  Copies of support agreements containing names 
              and phone numbers of contact points and available resources should be 
              kept in contingency plan files.  Hazardous materials incident drills, 
              with participation from other interested agencies, should be conducted 
              on a regular basis to ensure the effectiveness of the plan.  To 
              provide response teams with data necessary for prompt and safe 
              countermeasures, systems such as CHRIS, the Hazard Assessment Computer 
              System (HACS), and the Oil and Hazardous Materials Technical 
              Assistance Data Systems (OHMTADS) should be used.  Various chemical 
              data manuals, the Chemical Data Guide for Bulk Shipment by Water, 
              COMDTINST M16616.6, and information from other sources such as 
              Chemical Transportation Emergency Center (CHEMTREC), a commercial 
              chemical data service, are available.  Following each drill all 
              contingency plans should be evaluated and updated as necessary. 
  
############
      4.  Planning For Vessel And Waterfront Fires .  See chapter 8 of this volume. 
 
  
  
  6.B.5.  Planning For Natural Disaster Response .  In general, COTP's shall consult 
 
  
  
  6.C.1.a.    (1)  Establishment of alternate port operating headquarters and 
                   personnel reporting centers; 
  
              (2)  Emergency training programs; 
  
              (3)  Port security activities in addition to those of the Coast Guard; 
  
              (4)  Evaluation of port facilities, maintenance of operations, 
                   reconstruction, and restoration; and 
  
              (5)  Emergency stockpiling. 
  
          b.  Planning Guidelines .  Planning guidelines are contained in a MARAD 
              pamphlet "Emergency Port Operations of the National Shipping 
              Authority."  [NOTE:  The MARAD pamphlet "Emergency Shipping Operations 
              of the National Shipping Authority" contains information concerning 
              the requisitioning of ships during national emergencies.]  For 
              additional information see CG-368-1, CG-368-2, and CG-368-3, the 
              Nuclear, Biological, Chemical (NBC) Defense Preparedness Plan.  Local 
              port planning committees normally cease to function when they have 
              completed the local plans, except for updating them as necessary. 
              Planning proposals from these committees are not strictly oriented to 
              military or civil defense considerations, but rather to continuing or 
              restoring efficient operations of the port.  Port planning committees 
              are expected to maintain close liaison with local civil defense 
              planning groups and, in some cases, may serve this dual function 
              (obviously, the local COTP has a role in the port planning committee). 
  
          c.  Federal Involvement .  It is not the intention of the federal 
              government to operate port facilities in a national emergency, but to 
              control their use in the national interest.  It may be necessary to 
              activate a local port emergency operations group to implement the 
              committee's plans.  This group would be headed by a "director of 
              emergency port operations," and established and empowered by various 
              local port interests to serve during natural disasters or 
              emergencies.  In a national emergency, the group would be subject to 
              the authority of the federal lead agency to the extent that controls 
              may be necessary. 
  
      2.  Program Goals .  The common goal underlying both phases of the port 
          preparedness program is to provide a basis for the efficient operation of 
          U.S. ports during a sustained period of stress.  Traffic flow must be 
          maintained with a minimum of disruption to the port industry, by allowing 
          peacetime owners and operators of the facilities to continue operation of 
          the facilities themselves.  [NOTE:  At the same time, the government must 
          develop plans for federal control of ports if such a need arises.] 
  
      3.  MARAD Responsibilities In Port Emergencies .  [NOTE:  For further 
          information, see volume VII (TO BE DEVELOPED) of this manual.]  During 
          Phase 2, MARAD is responsible for the emergency use of U.S. ports.  MARAD 
          will take the following actions during emergencies: 
 
  
  
  6.C.3.  a.  Allocation of port facilities, equipment, and services (public and 
              private), to meet the requirements of the military, civil defense, war 
              production, and the essential civilian economy; 
  
          b.  Assignment of a maximum quota of cargo sealift for each port, 
              consistent with the port's overall transshipment capacity and 
              considering port facilities, equipment, labor, and available surface 
              and air transportation; 
  
          c.  Immediate allocations of port facilities and assignments of sealift 
              quotas, as required by possible damage to port areas, and required 
              diversions of ship routes due to enemy action at sea; 
  
############
          d.  Coordination and control, through the federal agency responsible or 
              land transportation, of traffic to and from port areas; 
  
          e.  Administration of priorities for the movement of traffic through port 
              areas; 
  
          f.  Guidance for the coordination of port terminal operations; control 
              over the use of port facilities, equipment, and services (public and 
              private), except those owned by, or allocated to, the Department of 
              Defense (DOD); 
  
          g.  Determination of the need for port development; coordination of the 
              rehabilitation of damaged port facilities, and the development of 
              alternate port facilities to meet essential requirements; 
  
          h.  Determination of the need to restore damaged or destroyed ports and 
              facilities, or to improvise new facilities; direction, coordination, 
              and control of federal, state, local, and private activities in 
              restoring or improvising facilities; 
  
          i.  Maintenance of current data on the cargo-handling capacities in U.S. 
              port areas, including current conditions affecting such capacities and 
              data reflecting total schedules and anticipated cargo movements; and 
  
          j.  Furnishing current data, in accordance with sealift schedules, to the 
              federal agency responsible for land transportation.  This allows the 
              latter agency to approve and issue block releases for portbound 
              traffic, relative to military traffic; advise this agency when 
              circumstances warrant MARAD control over traffic bound inland from the 
              port area, to minimize congestion in the port area. 
  
          [NOTE:  Port facilities and services owned by or preallocated to DOD are 
          generally excluded from MARAD controls; these facilities are subject to 
          regulation by DOD.  However, DOD facilities are subject to certain MARAD 
          controls, such as the allocation and reallocation of commercial port 
          facilities, movement of cargoes in port areas, and the determination of 
          maximum sealift quotas, for all purposes, to each port area.] 
 
  
  
  6.C.4.  Operation And Control Of Port Facilities .  The following information has 
          been extracted from the MARAD pamphlet "Emergency Port Operations of the 
          National Shipping Authority (NSA)": 
  
              "In keeping with the requirements of the National Plan for Emergency 
              Preparedness and Executive Order 11490, as amended, relating to the 
              emergency utilization and control of ports, the Maritime 
              Administration has prepared plans which would be implemented by NSA to 
              carry out delegated responsibilities in ports with minimum 
              interference or disruption at the local operating level.  Basically, 
              these plans involve the use of two types of standby contracts executed 
              prior to the declaration of an emergency, which would be implemented 
              upon the declaration of a national emergency." 
  
              "The first type of standby contract will ordinarily be drawn up with 
              one or more companies operating particular terminals to be selected at 
              various seaports.  Under this type of service contract, the Government 
              will pay tariff rates in effect at the time of any emergency for 
              dockage, wharfage, checking, loading and unloading of vehicles, wharf 
              demurrage, etc." 
  
              "The second type of standby contract will obtain the services of a 
              Federal Local Port Controller.  The contract will be made, as a 
              minimum, with the marine element of a port authority or similar agency 
              to fulfill the prescribed coordinating role at major ports where MARAD 
              has two or more terminal operators under standby contract.  Through 
              this contract, MARAD will obtain the services of a senior qualified 
              official as port coordinator and NSA local representative, supporting 
              staff, office space, communications, and other ancillary facilities." 
  
############
              "It must be emphasized that only a restricted number of standby 
              contracts will initially be drawn up.  This number will of course be 
              increased when conditions warrant." 
 
   
   
   
   ENCLOSURE (6-1): USE OF THE EXPLOSIVE QUANTITY & DISTANCE TABLES  
            
   When assessing the hazards associated with an explosion, the   
   principal effects of the explosives output to be considered are  
   blast pressure, primary and secondary fragments, thermal effects,  
   and chemical agent hazard.  Facility damage and personnel injury  
   from the explosion of mass detonating explosive materials,   
   class/division 1.1, results primarily from blast overpressure and  
   impulse.  For Quantity-Distance (Q-D) determinations, peak incident  
   overpressure generally is the parameter used to define maximum   
   permissible levels of exposure.      
            
   The violent release of energy from a detonation in a medium such as  
   air or water creates a sudden increase in pressure within that   
  
   medium.  The resulting pressure disturbance, or blast wave, is   
   characterized by an almost instantaneous rise from the ambient   
   pressure to a peak incident pressure.  This pressure increase, or  
   shock front, travels outward from the detonation point with a   
   diminishing velocity, but one that always exceeds the sonic velocity  
   of the medium.  As the shock front expands into increasingly larger  
   volumes of the medium, the peak incident pressure at the shock front  
   decreases and the duration of the pressure increases.    
  
   Separation distance requirements for explosives are based on the  
   degree of protection needed and amount of explosive material   
   involved.  When making Q-D determinations involving explosives,  
   distance is calculated using the formula:     
            
                               D = KW 1/3    
            
   where D is the separation distance in feet, K is a safety factor  
   depending on the risk assumed or permitted.  In accordance with DOD  
   standards, the Coast Guard established risk factor is 40 (K=40),  
   except in cases involving more than 250,000 lbs of explosives (where  
   K=50).  W is the net explosive weight (NEW) in pounds of ALL  
   explosives on board the vessel or vessels and the waterfront  
   facility.  When determining Q-D requirements for explosives use the  
 
   
   
   
   However, if the operation includes other than class/divisions 1.1  
   explosives, refer to DOD 6055.9-STD, Chapter 9 for determining Q-  
   D separation requirements.       
            
   For purposes of calculating explosives safety Q-D requirements,  
   commercial and military explosives are currently treated the same.  
   Coast Guard units refer to DOD 6055.9-STD and NAVSEA OP 5, Volume 1  
   in calculating explosive weight limitations and safe separation  
   distances for both military and commercial explosives.  DOD Q-D  
   standards are based on historical data collected and analyzed   
   through studies and observations of explosive incidents, both   
   military and commercial.  DOD 6055.9-STD has incorporated   
   fragmentation hazard ("missile hazard") into Q-D calculations for  
   safe separation distances.  Since certain types of military   
   explosive assemblies have a greater fragmentation hazard than   
   others, individual Q-D tables are established for various explosive  
   hazard divisions.  Exceptions for specific explosive items that have  
   received extensive evaluation, and for which a different minimum  
   distance is provided, are identified in DOD 6055.9-STD. In general,  
   we do not believe that military explosives are more sensitive or  
   less stable than commercial explosives.  C-4 is C-4 regardless who  
   ships it.         
            
############
   The exposed site (ES), or the potential hazard area surrounding  
   explosives, increases in size as the quantity of explosives at any  
   one location increase.  For this reason.- it is desirable to keep  
   the quantity of explosives present in one location to the minimum  
   amount that is consistent with operating requirements and maximum  
   utilization of land.  The distance separating the potential   
   explosion site (PES), from the ES, determines the permissible amount  
   of explosives permitted to be safely loaded/unloaded from vessels in  
   the close proximity to Inhabited Buildings (IBD), public traffic  
   routes (PTR) and other sensitive areas.     
            
   Public traffic route distance is the distance separating a PES from  
   a public highway, navigable waterway, passenger railway or other  
   traffic route used by the public.  Unless access is clearly limited;  
   e.g., by unsuitable terrain or travel not open to the public because  
   it is government-owned; public traffic route distances apply to all  
   roads outside of a government installation boundary.  Public traffic  
   route distances also apply to most passenger vehicle parking areas  
   and to open recreational areas that do not include bleacher stands  
   or other places where large numbers of personnel may be present.  
            
   Inhabited building distance is the distance between a PES and any  
   structure, except explosive operations buildings, where persons  
   live, work or assemble.  Inhabited building distances apply to all  
   areas beginning at the installation boundary.     
 
   
   
   
  Measurements of distance for determining the maximum allowance   
  quantity of explosives shall be made from the nearest wall of the  
  structure containing explosives to the nearest part of an exposed  
  structure site.  Separation distances are measured along straight  
  lines.  For large intervening topographical features such as hills,  
  measure over or around the feature, whichever is shorter.  For golf  
  courses, measure to the nearest edge of the tee or green and the  
  centerline of the fairways.       
            
                                EXAMPLES     
            
  [NOTE: The separation distances in the scenarios below are consistent 
  with DOD 6055.9-STD and NAVSEA OP 5 Volume 1. it should also be noted 
  that the scenarios below do not encompass all possible circumstances 
  a COTP may encounter.  The scenarios are only examples/tools for the 
  COTP to use when determining Q-D requirements for explosives.]   
            
  SCENARIO I        
            
  The M/V Creedmoor is inbound with 60,000 lbs. of class/division   
  1.1 military explosives for off-loading.  What are the IBD and   
  PTR required distances?        
            
  Using the tables provided: column 1 lists the NEW (60,000 lbs.),  
  column 5 gives the distance requirement to inhabited buildings (IBD)  
  as 1565 feet and column 9 gives the distance requirement to public  
  traffic routes (PTR) as 940 feet.      
            
  SCENARIO II        
            
  The M/V Granville is inbound with 20,000 lbs. of class/division 1.1  
  military explosives, 40,000 lbs. of class/division 1.2 and 10,000  
  lbs. of class/division 1.5 commercial explosives.  What are the IBD  
  and PTR required distances?       
            
  In accordance with the additive approach the Coast Guard uses when  
  determining the NEW, we will consider all the explosives on board the  
  vessel class/division 1.1 for calculating the NEW and Q-D   
  requirements.         
            
  Using the tables provided: column 1 lists the NEW (70,000 lbs.),  
  column 5 gives the distance requirement to inhabited buildings 1650  
  feet and column 9 gives the distance requirement to public traffic  
  routes 990 feet.        
            
############
  SCENARIO III        
           
  The M/V North Carolina carrying 20,000 of class/division 1.1 military  
  explosives and 5,000 lbs. of class/division 1.2 wants to load an  
  additional 10,000 lbs. of class/division 1.1. What are the IBD and  
  PTR required distances?        
 
   
   
   
  In accordance with the additive approach the Coast Guard uses when  
  determining the NEW, we will consider all the explosives on board the  
  vessel and dock as class/division 1.1 for calculating the NEW and Q-D  
  requirements.         
            
  SCENARIO III (cont'd)       
            
  Using the tables provided: column 1 list the NEW (35,000 lbs.),   
  column 5 gives the distance requirement to inhabited buildings 1310  
  feet and column 9 gives the distance requirement to public traffic  
  routes 785 feet.        
            
  SCENARIO IV        
            
  M/V SIRIUS, an MSC ship inbound with 1.2 million pounds    
  class/division 1.1. wants to load 40,000 lbs of blasting powder   
  (class/division 1.5).        
            
  In accordance with the additive approach the Coast Guard uses when  
  determining the NEW, we will consider all the explosives on board the 
  vessel and dock as class/division 1.1 for calculating the NEW and Q-D 
  requirements.         
            
  In situations involving more than 500,000 lbs of explosives you have  
  to calculate the Q-D requirements by using the formula described  
  above.  Also when calculating Q-D situations involving more than  
  250,000 lbs. of explosives K=50.      
            
  Basic Q-D formula for IBD distance: D = KW 1/3  
            
  In this scenario:   K =  50      
                      NEW  = 1,240,000    
                      W =  107.43 (cube root of 1,240,000)   
            
                      D =  50 x 1,240,000 1/3   
                      D =  50 x 107.43    
                      D =  5371.5     
            
                      The  minimum distance requirement to an   
                      Inhabited Building (IBD) is 5371.5 feet.   
            
  Basic Q-D formula for PTR distance: PTR = IBD x 0.60 
            
  In this scenario:   PTR = 5371.5 x .60    
                      PTR = 3222.9     
            
                      The minimum distance requirement to a public  
                      traffic route (PTR) is 3222.9 feet.    
 
   
                             FIGURE (6-1-1) 
   
             Hazard Division 1.1, Inhabited Building and Public Traffic Route 
                                  Distances (See Notes) 
   
  Net       Distance in Feet to Inhabited         Distance in Feet to Public 
  Explosive         Building From:                   Traffic Route From: 
  Weight    Earth-covered Magazine     Other      Earth-covered Magazine    Other 
  (NEW)                                PES                                  PES 
  (lbs) 
   
        Front     Side      Rear              Front     Side      Rear       
  Col1  Col2^1,8  Col3^1,8  Col4^2,8  Col5^3  Col6^4,8  Col7^5,8  Col8^6,8  Col9^7 
                                                                             
   
  1      500        250       250     1,250    300       150       150      750 
  2      500        250       250     1,250    300       150       150      750 
  5      500        250       250     1,250    300       150       150      750 
  10     500        250       250     1,250    300       150       150      750 
  20     500        250       250     1,250    300       150       150      750 
  30     500        250       250     1,250    300       150       150      750 
  40     500        250       250     1,250    300       150       150      750 
  50     500        250       250     1,250    300       150       150      750 
  100    500        250       250     1,250    300       150       150      750 
  150    500        250       250     1,250    300       150       150      750 
  200    700        250       250     1,250    420       150       150      750 
  250    700        250       250     1,250    420       150       150      750 
  300    700        250       250     1,250    420       150       150      750 
  350    700        250       250     1,250    420       150       150      750 
  400    700        250       250     1,250    420       150       150      750 
  450    700        250       250     1,250    420       150       150      750 
  500    1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  600    1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  700    1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  800    1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  900    1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  1,000  1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  1,500  1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  2,000  1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  3,000  1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  4,000  1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  5,000  1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  6,000  1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  7,000  1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  8,000  1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  9,000  1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  10,000 1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  15,000 1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  20,000 1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  25,000 1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  30,000 1,250      1,250     1,250   1,250    750       750       750      750 
  35,000 1,250      1,250     1,250   1,310    750       750       750      785 
  40,000 1,250      1,250     1,250   1,370    750       750       750      820 
 
############
   
                             FIGURE (6-1-1) 
   
             Hazard Division 1.1, Inhabited Building and Public Traffic Route 
                        Distances (See Notes) 
   
  Net         Distance in Feet to Inhabited         Distance in Feet to Public Traffic 
  Explosive     Building From:                        Route From: 
  Weight        Earth-covered Magazine   Other         Earth-covered Magazine  Other 
  (NEW)                                  PES                                   PES 
   
  (lbs)       Front    Side     Rear                Front    Side     Rear 
  Col^1       Col2^1,8 Col3^1,8 Col4^2,8 Col5^3     Col6^4,8 Col7^5,8 Col8^8,8 Col9^7 
   
  45,000      1,250     1,250    1,250  1,425       750       750     750      855 
  50,000      1,290     1,290    1,250  1,475       775       775     750      885 
  55,000      1,330     1,330    1,250  1,520       800       800     750      910 
  60,000      1,370     1,370    1,250  1,565       820       820     750      940 
  65,000      1,405     1,405    1,250  1,610       845       845     750      965 
  70,000      1,440     1,440    1,250  1,650       865       865     750      990 
  75,000      1,475     1,475    1,250  1,685       885       885     750      1,010 
  80,000      1,510     1,510    1,250  1,725       905       905     750      1,035 
  85,000      1,540     1,540    1,250  1,760       925       925     750      1,055 
  90,000      1,570     1,570    1,250  1,795       940       940     750      1,075 
  95,000      1,595     1,595    1,250  1,825       960       960     750      1,095 
  100,000     1,625     1,625    1,250  1,855       975       975     750      1,115 
  110,000     1,740     1,740    1,290  1,960       1,045     1,045   770      1,175 
  120,000     1,855     1,855    1,415  2,065       1,110     1,110   850      1,240 
  125,000     1,910     1,910    1,480  2,115       1,165     1,165   890      1,270 
  130,000     1,965     1,965    1,545  2,165       1,180     1,180   925      1,300 
  140,000     2,070     2,070    1,675  2,255       1,245     1,245   1,005    1,355 
  150,000     2,175     2,175    1,805  2,350       1,305     1,305   1,085    1,410 
  160,000     2,280     2,280    1,935  2,435       1,370     1,370   1,160    1,460 
  170,000     2,385     2,385    2,070  2,520       1,430     1,430   1,240    1,515 
  175,000     2,435     2,435    2,135  2,565       1,460     1,460   1,280    1,540 
  180,000     2,485     2,485    2,200  2,605       1,490     1,490   1,320    1,565 
  190,000     2,585     2,585    2,335  2,690       1,550     1,550   1,400    1,615 
  200,000     2,680     2,680    2,470  2,770       1,610     1,610   1,480    1,660 
  225,000     2,920     2,920    2,810  2,965       1,750     1,750   1,685    1,780 
  250,000     3,150     3,150    3,150  3,150       1,890     1,890   1,890    1,890 
  275,000     3,250     3,250    3,250  3,250       1,950     1,950   1,950    1,950 
  300,000     3,345     3,345    3,345  3,345       2,005     2,005   2,005    2,005 
  325,000     3,440     3,440    3,440  3,440       2,005     2,065   2,065    2,065 
  350,000     3,525     3,525    3,525  3,525       2,115     2,115   2,115    2,115 
  375,000     3,605     3,605    3,605  3,605       2,165     2,165   2,165    2,165 
  400,000     3,685     3,685    3,685  3,685       2,210     2,210   2,210    2,210 
  425,000     3,760     3,760    3,760  3,760       2,250     2,250   2,250    2,250 
  450,000     3,830     3,830    3,830  3,830       2,300     2,300   2,300    2,300 
  475,000     3,900     3,900    3,900  3,900       2,340     2,340   2,340    2,340 
  500,000     3,970     3,970    3,970  3,970       2,380     2,380   2,380    2,380 
 
   
                             FIGURE (6-1-2) 
               NOTES FOR USING QUANTITY & DISTANCE TABLES 
   
  1    Bases for Columns 2 and 3 distances: 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7.  POLLUTION RESPONSE 
 
CONTENTS 
  
  SECTION                                                                PAGE 
  
  7.A.          General Provisions                                        7-1 
  7.A.1.            Authority                                             7-1 
  7.A.2.            National Response Organization                        7-1 
  7.A.2.a                Role Of The OSC                                  7-1 
  7.A.2.b.               OSC's Emergency Task Force (ETF)                 7-1   7.A.2.c.               Interagency Functions                            7-2   7.A.3.            Response Alternatives                                 7-2     7.B.          Pollution Response Under The FWPCA                        7-2   7.B.1.            Handling The Report Of A Pollution 
                    Incident                                              7-2 
  7.B.1.a.               State Notification                               7-5 
  7.B.1.b.               Notification Of Natural Resource                          Trustees                                         7-5   7.B.2.            Preliminary Assessment                                7-5   7.B.2.a.               Determining The Need For On-Scene                          Assessment                                       7-5   7.B.2.b.               Determining FWPCA Applicability                  7-6   7.B.2.c.               Pollution Countermeasures                        7-6 
  7.B.2.d.               Feasibility Of Removal Actions                   7-7 
  7.B.3.            Actions Required When The Polluter Is                     Identified                                            7-7   7.B.3.a.               Notice Of Federal Interest                       7-7 
  7.B.3.b.               Monitoring Removal Operations                    7-9 
  7.B.3.c.               "Arranging For Removal"                          7-9 
  7.B.3.d.               Federal Assumption Of Response 
                         Activities                                       7-9 
  7.B.4.            Initiating Federal Removal Operations                 7-10 
  7.B.4.a.               Resources                                        7-10 
  7.B.4.a.(1)                 Introduction                                7-10 
  7.B.4.a.(2)                 Managing A Commercial Contractor            7-12 
  7.B.4.a.(3)                 Use Of Coast Guard Unit Equipment           7-12 
  7.B.4.a.(4)                 Use of The State In Removal 
                              Operations                                  7-12 
  7.B.4.a.(5)                 Use Of Other Federal Agencies               7-13 
  7.B.4.b.               Accessing The FWPCA 311(k) Pollution Fund        7-13 
  7.B.4.c.               Supervising Federally-Funded Removal 
                         Operations                                       7-20 
  7.B.5.            Determining Removal Completeness                      7-20 
  7.B.6.            Documenting The Response                              7-21 
  7.B.6.a.               General                                          7-21 
  7.B.6.b.               Reports Required For Every Incident              7-21 
  7.B.6.b.(1)                 POLREPS                                     7-21 
  7.B.6.b.(2)                 MSIS Marine Pollution Product Set 
 
############
  
  
                                 CONTENTS 
  
  SECTION                                                                 PAGE 
  
  7.B.6.c.(1)(b)                   Pollution Control Contractor Daily 
                                   Report, Form CG-5136                   7-23 
  7.B.6.c.(1)(c)                   OSC Certification Of Invoices          7-23 
  7.B.6.c.(2)                 State And Other Federal Agency Costs        7-24 
  7.B.6.c.(3)                 Cost Summary Report                         7-24 
  7.B.6.c.(3)(a)                   Costs Reimbursable To The Pollution 
                                   Fund                                   7-24 
  7.B.6.c.(3)(b)                   Payments From The Pollution Fund       7-25 
  7.B.6.d.               Reports Of Major Pollution Incidents             7-29 
  7.B.6.e.               District Requirements                            7-30 
  7.B.7.            Use Of The FWPCA 311(k) Pollution Fund                7-30 
  7.B.7.a.               General                                          7-30 
  7.B.7.b.               Reimbursable Activities                          7-34 
  7.B.7.c.               Recoverable Costs                                7-34 
  7.B.7.d.               Damage Assessment Studies                        7-35 
  7.B.7.e.               Expenditure Limits                               7-35 
  
  7.C.          Procedures Unique To Hazardous Substance Releases         7-35 
  7.C.1.            General                                               7-35 
  7.C.1.a.               Hazardous Substance Response Functions           7-36 
  7.C.1.b.               Use Of CERCLA Guidance                           7-36 
  7.C.1.c.               Levels Of Response Capability                    7-37 
  7.C.2.            Preliminary Assessment                                7-37 
  7.C.2.a.               Determining CERCLA Applicability                 7-38 
  7.C.2.b.               Coast Guard, EPA, DOD Jurisdiction               7-38 
  7.C.2.c.               Removal Action Determination                     7-39 
  7.C.3.            Actions Required When The Polluter Is Identified      7-40 
  7.C.4.            Initiating Federal Removal Operations                 7-40 
  7.C.5.            Determining Removal Completeness                      7-43 
  7.C.6.            Entry Into Contaminated Areas                         7-44 
  7.C.6.a.               Response Types                                   7-44 
  7.C.6.b.               Development Of A Response Plan                   7-45 
  7.C.6.c.               Entry Procedures                                 7-46 
  7.C.6.c.(1)                 Personal Safety Practices                   7-46 
  7.C.6.c.(2)                 Safety Procedures                           7-46 
  7.C.7.            Documenting The Response                              7-47 
  7.C.7.a.               POLREPS                                          7-47 
  7.C.7.b.               Cost Documentation And OSC Report                7-47 
  7.C.8.            Use of The CERCLA Fund                                7-47 
  7.C.8.a.               Introduction                                     7-47 
  7.C.8.b.               Funding Vendor Costs                             7-48 
  7.C.8.c.               Funding Non-Vendor Costs                         7-48 
  7.C.8.d.               Additional Funding Capabilities                  7-48 
  7.C.8.e.               Expenditure Limits                               7-48 
  
  7.D.          Procedures For Specific Response Activities               7-57 
  7.D.1.            Entry Onto Private Property                           7-57 
  7.D.1.a.               Emergency Conditions                             7-57 
  7.D.1.b.               Nonemergency Conditions                          7-57 
  7.D.2.            Controlling Access                                    7-57 
  7.D.3.                 Use Of Dispersants Or Other Chemical 
                         Additives                                        7-57 
 
  
  
                                 CONTENTS 
  
  SECTION                                                                   PAGE 
  
  7.D.4.        Use Of Special Forces Or Teams                            7-58 
  7.D.4.a.          National Strike Force (NSF)                           7-58 
  7.D.4.b.          Environmental Response Team (ERT)                     7-58 
  7.D.4.c.          Scientific Support coordinators (SSC's)               7-59 
  7.D.4.c.(1)               Assessment Of Adverse Effects/Mitigation 
                            Strategies                                    7-59 
  7.D.4.c.(2)               Contingency Planning Assistance               7-60 
  7.D.4.d.              Public Information Assist Team (PIAT)             7-60 
  7.D.4.e.              Agency For Toxic Substances And Disease 
                        Registry (ATSDR) Public Health Advisors           7-60 
  7.D.5.        Procedures For Handling Pollution Incidents Resulting 
                From Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Activities             7-61 
  7.D.6.        Funding Deepwater Port (DWP) Pollution Incident Response  7-61 
  7.D.7.        Funding Trans-Alaska Pipeline (TAP) Oil 
                Pollution Incidents                                       7-61 
  7.D.8.        Intervention On The High Seas                             7-63 
  7.D.9.        Disposal Of Recovered Pollutants                          7-63 
  7.D.9.a.              Introduction                                      7-63 
  7.D.9.b.              Compliance With Waste Disposal Regulations        7-63 
  7.D.9.b.(1)               Resource Conservation And Recovery Act 
                            (RCRA) Applicability                          7-63 
  7.D.9.b.(2)               RCRA Concerns For OSC's                       7-64 
  7.D.9.b.(3)               OSC Procedure                                 7-64 
  7.D.9.b.(4)               Manifest Forms                                7-66 
  7.D.9.b.(5)               Transportation For Disposal                   7-66 
  
  7.E.          Information Systems And Resources                         7-66 
  
  7.F.          National Strike Force (NSF) Administration                7-74 
  7.F.1.            Administrative And Operational Control                7-74 
  7.F.1.a.              Atlantic Strike Team (AST)                        7-74 
  7.F.1.b.              Gulf Strike Team (GST)                            7-74 
  7.F.1.c.              Pacific Strike Team (PST)                         7-74 
  7.F.1.d.              NSF Dive Team                                     7-74 
  7.F.2.            Response Standards                                    7-74 
  7.F.2.a.              Personnel Standards                               7-74 
  7.F.2.b.              Equipment Standards                               7-75 
  7.F.2.c.              Foreign Assistance                                7-75 
  7.F.3.            Response Planning                                     7-75 
  7.F.3.a.              Unit Planning                                     7-75 
  7.F.3.b.              On-Scene Integration                              7-75 
  7.F.4.            Training                                              7-76 
  7.F.4.a.              Team Personnel                                    7-76 
  7.F.4.b.              Other Units                                       7-76 
  7.F.5.            NSF Dive Team                                         7-78 
  7.F.6.            Required Reports                                      7-78 
  7.F.6.a.              Operational Status                                7-78 
  7.F.6.b.              Advisaries                                        7-78 
 
############
  
  
                                 CONTENTS 
  
  SECTION                                                                 PAGE 
  
  7.F.6.c.          Quarterly Activities Report (QAR), RCS-G-WER-14019    7-80 
  7.F.6.d.          Incident Summary                                      7-80 
  7.F.6.e.          Reimbursement Requests                                7-80 
 
  
  CHAPTER 7.  POLLUTION RESPONSE 
  
  A.  General Provisions . 
  
      1.  Authority .  Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act 
          (FWPCA), as amended (33 U.S.C. 1321) and the Comprehensive Environmental 
          Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA) (42 U.S.C. 9601, 
          et seq.), are the principal authorities for federal response to discharges 
          of oil and releases of hazardous substances.  The procedures and standards 
          for conducting responses are contained in the National Oil and Hazardous 
          Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP) (40 CFR 300.34(b)).  Each 
          Coast Guard captain of the port (COTP), under the NCP and applicable 
          Regional Contingency Plan (RCP), coordinates federal activities on scene 
          as either the predesignated On-Scene Coordinator (OSC) or the first 
          federal official in the absence of the predesignated OSC.  The OSC's 
          objective is to ensure rapid, efficient mitigation of actual or threatened 
          pollution releases and discharges.  This chapter supplements the 
          procedures for carrying out the Coast Guard's responsibilities under the 
          NCP.  Legislative mandates and Executive Orders (E.O.'s) authorizing Coast 
          Guard actions in pollution response and COTP functions are listed in 
          volume I of this manual. 
  
      2.  National Response Organization . 
  
          a.  Role Of The OSC .  It is the policy of the Coast Guard to ensure that 
              timely and effective response action is taken to control and remove 
              discharges of oil and releases of hazardous substances, including 
              substantial threats of discharges and releases, into the coastal zone, 
              unless such removal actions are being conducted properly by the 
              responsible party.  As the single federal official responsible for 
              ensuring proper pollution response and enforcement, the OSC is the 
              most important component in the national response organization.  The 
              OSC must quickly determine: 
  
              (1)  The nature, amount, and location of a pollutant; 
  
              (2)  The potential impact on public health and welfare or on the 
                   environment; and 
  
              (3)  The countermeasures necessary to adequately contain, control, or 
                   remove the pollutants. 
  
              The OSC shall use appropriate legislative and regulatory authorities, 
              the NCP, regional and local contingency plans, and other circumstances 
              unique to each incident to ensure that pollution response is carried 
              out expeditiously and aggressively. 
  
          b.  OSC's Emergency Task Force (ETF) .  A Coast Guard OSC manages the ETF 
              cited in the NCP (40 CFR 300.32(b)).  The ETF must be able to assess a 
              spill to determine response measures, monitor and supervise pollution 
              countermeasures, employ limited Coast Guard equipment until a 
              contractor arrives, document all phases of the response, and conduct 
 
  
  7.A.2.  b.  (cont'd) investigations.  While many responsibilities may be 
              delegated to the OSC's staff, the OSC remains solely responsible to 
              determine the threat to public health and welfare, to authorize the 
              expenditure of federal funds, and to ensure that necessary response 
              actions are performed.  When the situation mandates, the OSC shall 
              augment his or her staff with whatever expertise, personnel, and/or 
              equipment that is available through national, regional, and local 
              contingency plans.  Most notable are the National Strike Force (NSF), 
              the Environmental Response Team (ERT), the Scientific Support 
              Coordinator (SSC), and the Public Information Assist Team (PIAT) 
              described in the NCP as Special Forces.  The capabilities of available 
              Special Forces and guidance on when they should be contacted are found 
              in paragraph 7.D.4 below. 
  
############
          c.  Interagency Functions .  The National and Regional Response Teams (NRT 
              and RRT) act as the coordinating bodies that assist the OSC in rapidly 
              obtaining expertise or resources from other federal or state 
              organizations.  Agencies comprising the NRT and RRT, along with their 
              respective areas of expertise and responsibilities, are listed in the 
              NCP (40 CFR 300). 
  
      3.  Response Alternatives .  The NCP describes separate procedures for 
          "discharges" under the FWPCA, and "releases" under CERCLA.  CERCLA does 
          not apply to oil spills, but is more comprehensive than the FWPCA, and it 
          should be used for response to all hazardous substance releases, even if 
          the FWPCA is applicable.  [NOTE:  In order to enhance the potential for 
          removal cost recovery in the case of a hazardous substance discharge from 
          a foreign flag vessel neither owned nor operated by a United States 
          citizen, both Section 104(a) CERCLA and Section 311(c) FWPCA should be 
          cited as authority for necessary removal actions.  Of course this would be 
          limited to circumstances where both statutes apply.  Since CERCLA Trust 
          Fund monies will be used, CERCLA procedures will still be followed.] 
          Usually, a limited federal effort is required, beyond the investigation 
          duties described in volume V of this manual, if either mitigation measures 
          are not feasible, or the polluter and/or other parties are taking 
          appropriate measures.  When more extensive federal involvement is 
          required, the OSC must rapidly determine the appropriate response 
          alternative provided for by the FWPCA, CERCLA, or other authority. 
          Figures 7-1 and 7-2 are "standard" flowcharts for pollution response under 
          the FWPCA and CERCLA, respectively.  Section 7.B below details pollution 
          response under the FWPCA.  Most of the procedures also apply to CERCLA and 
          can generally be used in response to hazardous substance releases. 
          Section 7.C below provides additional procedures that are unique to CERCLA. 
  B.  Pollution Response Under The FWPCA . 
  
      1.  Handling The Report Of A Pollution Incident .  The NCP (40 CFR 300.51(b)) 
          requires that all reports of discharges be made to the National Response 
          Center (NRC), unless reporting to the NRC is not practicable.  In such 
          cases, reports can be made to the Coast Guard or EPA predesignated OSC for 
          the area where the discharge occurs.  The OSC is required to promptly 
          relay all such reports to the NRC.  Telephone relay is not required. 
 
  
  7.B.1.  (cont'd) Entry of the NRC Case Number in the appropriate field of the 
          Marine Safety Information System Marine Pollution Product Set (MSIS-MP) 
          will meet this relay requirement. 
  
          a.  State Notification .  On receipt of a pollution incident, the OSC shall 
              notify the appropriate state representative and any other agency whose 
              services may be necessary during a response.  This notification also 
              serves as notice to the applicable state natural resource trustees. 
  
          b.  Notification Of Natural Resource Trustees .  The OSC should notify the 
              appropriate land managing agencies or trustees of natural resources 
              whenever there is any indication of resources potentially being 
              affected by an oil discharge or hazardous substance release.  Federal 
              resource trustees are identified in Subpart G of the NCP and should 
              also be identified in the RCP. 
  
############
      2.  Preliminary Assessment .  The OSC shall determine the discharge's magnitude 
          and severity, the identity of suspected polluters, threats to public 
          health and welfare, the feasibility of countermeasures, and the Coast 
          Guard's jurisdictional authority to pursue pollution countermeasures for 
          all pollution reports. 
  
          a.  Determining The Need For On-Scene Assessment .  Sections 300.52 and .64 
              of the NCP require that the OSC conduct a preliminary assessment of 
              each reported discharge or release.  However, this assessment does not 
              necessarily require the on-scene presence of Coast Guard personnel. 
              The following policy should be used in determining whether Coast Guard 
              presence is required on scene: 
  
              (1)  The OSC will rapidly assess every reported discharge of oil or 
                   release of hazardous substances.  Based on the geographical size 
                   of the zone, resource limitations, and information received in 
                   the notification, the OSC may, as necessary, use capable 
                   representatives of other federal, state, or local government 
                   agencies for this initial assessment. 
  
              (2)  If the responsible party is conducting the removal, the OSC will 
                   monitor, or assure that a capable representative from another 
                   federal, state, or local government agency monitors, all cleanup 
                   activities.  In those cases where a Coast Guard or other 
                   government official is not on scene, conduct monitoring by the 
                   best practical means available. 
  
              (3)  In all cases when Coast Guard investigation is required for civil 
                   or non-notification penalties, investigators will be dispatched 
                   in accordance with procedures detailed in volume V of this manual. 
  
              Whether or not Coast Guard personnel are dispatched, the Coast Guard 
              COTP shall enter the pollution incident in the MSIS-MP using available 
              information (see subparagraph 7.B.6.b.(2) below). 
 
  
  7.B.2.  b.  Determining FWPCA Applicability .  The OSC must ensure that three 
              criteria are met before exercising enforcement or removal activity: 
  
              (1)  There was a DISCHARGE or substantial threat of a discharge (see 
                   the FWPCA, Section 311(a)(2), but not that removal authority is 
                   not limited by exclusions (A), (B), or (C)); 
  
              (2)  Of OIL or HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES (see the FWPCA, Section 311(a)(1) 
                   for oil, 40 CFR 117 for hazardous substances); 
  
              (3)  Into or upon the NAVIGABLE waters of the United States, adjoining 
                   shorelines, or into or upon the waters of the contiguous zone, or 
                   in connection with activities under the Outer Continental Shelf 
                   Lands Act (OCSLA) or the Deepwater Port Act of 1974 (DPA), or 
                   which may affect natural resources belonging to, appertaining to, 
                   or under the exclusive management authority of the United States 
                   (see the FWPCA, Section 311(b)(3)).  "Quantities which may be 
                   harmful" (40 CFR 110.3 and 117) have no bearing on authority to 
                   undertake removal action. 
  
              Section 502(7) of the FWPCA broadly defines navigable waters as 
              "waters of the United States."  This includes waters "traditionally" 
              recognized as navigable, along with streams, creeks, lakes, and ponds 
              which form their tributaries.  Storm drains and other artificial 
              systems are extensions of waterways when an effluent could flow 
              through them into the tributary system without passing through a 
              treatment plant.  "Waters of the U.S." also include seasonally dry 
              watercourses when there is water standing or flowing.  The mere 
              existence of a channel or bed through which water could flow is, 
              however, insufficient without the actual presence of water or 
              potential presence of water in the near future due to tidal 
              fluctuations, seasonal flooding, or other occurrences.  Therefore, 
              "navigability" is not the controlling factor.  Definitions of 
              jurisdictional terms are contained in 33 CFR 2.05. 
  
############
          c.  Pollution Countermeasures .  The OSC must ensure that response actions 
              to mitigate damage are initiated as soon as possible after discovery 
              or notification of a discharge or potential discharge.  These actions 
              include, but are not limited to: 
  
              (1)  Containment measures and monitoring the spread of the pollutant; 
  
              (2)  Measures required to warn the public of acute danger; 
  
              (3)  Provision of temporary drinking water sources; 
  
              (4)  Monitoring to determine the extent of contamination; 
  
              (5)  Removal/cleanup/disposal measures; 
  
              (6)  Providing navigational cautions while response activities are 
                   underway; and 
 
  
  
  7.B.2.c.    (7)  Response efforts required to locate and isolate spill sources 
                   or to identify the properties of the discharged pollutants. 
  
              Such countermeasures should be taken by the responsible party 
              (usually through cooperatives or contractors), but may be 
              initiated by the OSC if circumstances require.  The long-term 
              solution to some spills may require the construction of major 
              capital structures including advanced treatment systems or 
              extension dikes.  While such construction may mitigate the danger 
              to the public, it normally is not appropriate to undertake 
              directly such extensive actions under Section 311(c) of the FWPCA. 
  
          d.  Feasibility Of Removal Actions .  The OSC must use experience and 
              best judgment when applying the FWPCA authority in removing, 
              arranging for removal, or ensuring the proper removal of 
              pollutants.  Considerations in determining the feasibility of 
              removal include: 
  
              (1)  Will removal action cause more damage to the environment than 
                   allowing the pollutant to naturally dissipate? 
  
              (2)  Can cleanup be initiated before the pollutant disperses, 
                   making cleanup impractical? 
  
              (3)  Can equipment be deployed without excessive risk to the life 
                   and health of personnel? 
  
      3.  Actions Required When The Polluter Is Identified .  When the polluter 
          is identified, the OSC shall undertake the procedures described below. 
          [NOTE:  It is of particular importance that the OSC make a reasonable 
          effort to have the responsible party voluntarily and promptly perform 
          removal operations (see the NCP, 40 CFR 300.52).] 
  
          a.  Notice Of Federal Interest .  The OSC shall present a Notice of 
              Federal Interest for an Oil Pollution Incident (Form CG-5549) to 
              every suspected discharger.  [NOTE:  This requirement is for 
              internal direction only.  The failure of an OSC to present this 
              Notice in a given case does not affect any liability of any person 
              which may arise in that case.]  This informs the suspected 
              discharger of a potential violation of the FWPCA, as amended, and 
              of his or her possible liability to a civil penalty of up to 
              $25,000 per day of violation or up to 3 times the costs incurred 
              by the OSLTF.  Notice should also be made in potential pollution 
              incidents when the actions of the potential discharger to abate 
              the threat are considered insufficient, and Federal action is 
              contemplated.  If possible, any witness(es) should accompany the 
              OSC's representative when the Notice is served.  The OSC's 
              representative shall retain the OSC's copy of the Notice that is 
              signed and dated by the suspected discharger, or the suspected 
              discharger's representative.  If the discharger refuses to sign, 
              the Notice will still be served.  The investigator will note the 
              circumstances on the copy, sign and date it, and have the 
 
############
 
 
FIGURE 7-3 
  
  
  
   _______________________ 
   (Address of Responsible Party) 
  
  _______________________                                       (Date) 
  
  _______________________                                    ___________ 
   
  
  Gentlemen: 
  
  
  On or about_______ (Date) _____, an oil pollution incident occurred or threatens to 
occur at Vessel/Facility Name, Location, and Body of Water).  You may be financially 
responsible for that incident.  Under Federal Statutes, the United States Government may 
take action to minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare that is 
threatened or that may be caused by this incident. 
  
  Under the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, the responsible party is liable for, among other 
things, removal costs and damages resulting from this incident.  The failure or refusal 
of the responsible party to provide all reasonable cooperation and assistance requested 
by the Federal On-Scene Coordinator (OSC) will eliminate any defense or entitlement to 
limited liability which otherwise might be available under the Act. 
  
  You are advised that your failure to properly carry out the removal of the discharge 
as ordered by the OSC or to comply with any administrative orders necessary to protect 
the public health and welfare, may subject you to additional penalties.  For such 
failure, owners, operators, or persons in charge of the vessel or facility from which 
the oil is discharged are subject under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (FWPCA), 
as amended, to a civil penalty of up to $25,000 per day of violation or up to 3 times 
the costs incurred by the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund.  Should you require further 
information concerning this matter, please contact          (Name of OSC)          at 
the above address and telephone number. 
  
  As long as the OSC determines that you are taking adequate actions in this matter, 
Federal removal action will usually be limited to monitoring the progress of your 
actions and providing guidance as necessary. Under the FWPCA, as amended, your response 
actions may be taken into account in determining the amount of any penalty assessed as a 
result of the discharge. 
   
                                                      Sincerely, 
   
  
                                                      (Signature of OSC or 
Representative)  
  
  
  Received and Acknowledged:  (Signature of Responsible Party)  
  
  
                Witness(es):  (Signature, Date, and Time)  
  
  
                              (Signature, Date, and Time)  
 
  
  
  7.B.3.  a.  (cont'd)  witness(es) sign and date it.  Should the 
              owner/operator be unavailable, the Notice shall be sent via 
              certified mail, return receipt requested.  A sample Notice of 
              Federal Interest for an Oil Pollution Incident (Form CG-5549) is 
              shown in Figure 7-3. 
  
          b.  Monitoring Removal Operations .  Normally, the removal is done by 
              the responsible party, and the OSC need only ensure that it is 
              being conducted properly.  "Proper" includes both the timeliness 
              and the adequacy of the removal operations that are necessary to 
              control the spread of the discharge and mitigate the environmental 
              effect.  When appropriate, the OSC shall guide the discharger on 
              the preferred course of action.  The OSC shall use good judgment 
              in determining the extent of monitoring required and the need for 
              the presence of the Coast Guard or other government agencies on 
              scene.  The extent of monitoring required will largely depend on 
              the known capabilities and the reliability of the discharger 
              and/or the discharger's cleanup firm.  The OSC will monitor, or 
              assure that a capable representative from another federal, state, 
              or local government agency monitors, all responsible party 
              cleanups.  Monitoring tasks include: 
  
############
              (1)  Prioritizing the areas to be cleaned-up and the degree of 
                   removal that is required; 
  
              (2)  Providing advice on removal methods; 
  
              (3)  Ensuring only authorized means of cleanup are used (i.e., no 
                   chemical agents other than those authorized by the NCP, 
                   Subpart H) (see paragraph 7.D.3 below); 
  
              (4)  Ensuring selected cleanup techniques and equipment result in 
                   the least environmental damage or interference with 
                   designated water uses including the protection of vulnerable 
                   or endangered species of waterfowl and wildlife; and 
  
              (5)  Recommending changes to improve cleanup operations. 
  
          c.  " Arranging For Removal ."  (TO BE DEVELOPED) 
  
          d.  Federal Assumption Of Response Activities .  Under FWPCA Section 
              (311)(c)(1), whenever a polluter is unknown or not acting 
              responsibly, or when its removal effort is insufficient, or to 
              present the substantial threat of a discharge, the OSC may assume 
              total or partial control of response activities.  The OSC must 
              inform the suspected polluter, if known, of this action by issuing 
              a Notice of Federal Assumption of Response Activities, even if the 
              suspected polluter has not initiated any action.  This Notice 
              references the Notice of Federal Interest for an Oil Pollution 
              Incident and indicates the date and time the Federal response is 
              initiated.  The same procedures used for issuing and obtaining 
              signatures for the Notice of Federal Interest for an Oil Pollution 
 
  
  
  7.B.3.d.    (cont'd)  Incident apply.  Figure 7-4 is a sample Notice of 
              Federal Assumption of Response Activities.  [NOTE:  This 
              requirement is for internal direction only.  The failure of an 
              OSC to present a Notice of Federal Assumption of Response 
              Activities in a given case does not affect any liability of any 
              person which may arise in that case.]  In some instances, the OSC 
              may determine that the polluter's response efforts should 
              continue, but that some Federal assistance is necessary to 
              augment the cleanup (e.g., cleanup resources that the polluter 
              cannot or will not provide).  Whenever it is necessary for the 
              federal government to expend funds in support of a cleanup 
              operation, for purposes other than monitoring, the OSC should 
              declare a Federal spill for the area(s) for which he or she is 
              assuming control, activate the OSLTF to cover expenses and take 
              whatever actions are necessary to ensure a proper cleanup.  In 
              these cases, the Notice of Federal Assumption shall clearly 
              delineate those actions or areas for which the OSC is assuming 
              control or providing other resources.  [NOTE:  The term "declare 
              a Federal spill" as used in this chapter means:  in the case 
              where a suspected polluter has been identified, the presentment 
              of the Notice of Federal Assumption; or in other cases, the 
              initiation of Federal removal operation.] 
  
      4.  Initiating Federal Removal Operations . 
  
          a.  Resources . 
  
              (1)  Introduction .  The OSC may use the OSLTF to pay for removal 
                   costs as described in subparagraph 7.B.3.d above.  In 
                   addition to the resources listed below, any of the Special 
                   Forces (see paragraph 7.D.4 below) may be activated whenever 
                   local resources are unable to provide necessary equipment, 
                   personnel, or expertise.  In managing a Federally funded 
                   removal, the OSC must make every effort to: 
  
############
                   (a)  Minimize elapsed time from notification to deployment of 
                        equipment; 
  
                   (b)  Match equipment and personnel to spill characteristics; 
                        and 
 
  
  
  
                                 FIGURE 7-4 
  
              SAMPLE NOTICE OF FEDERAL ASSUMPTION OF RESPONSE ACTIVITIES 
  
  (Name/Address)  
  
  Gentlemen: 
  
  My letter of (date) notified you of federal interest in an actual or potential 
  pollution incident at (vessel/facility)  at (location and body of water) , for which 
  you are presently considered financially responsible. 
  
  You are hereby given notice that your actions to abate this threat and to remove 
  the substance(s), and to mitigate (its/their) effects have been evaluated as 
  unsatisfactory by the U.S. Coast Guard On-Scene Coordinator (OSC), (name). 
  Effective (date/time) , the Coast Guard will conduct all response activities under 
  the authority of [Section 311(c)(1) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act 
  (FWPCA), as amended] [Section 104(a)(1) of the Comprehensive Environmental 
  Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA)].  Removal will be 
  effected in accordance with the criteria of the National Oil and Hazardous 
  Substances Pollution Contingency Plan and federal regulations.  You may then be 
  liable for all removal costs incurred by the federal government as set forth in 
  [Section 311(f) of the FWPCA] [Section 107(a) of CERCLA]. 
  
  Should you require further information concerning this matter, you should 
  contact:  (name, address, and telephone number of OSC) . 
  
                                     Sincerely, 
  
  
  
                                     (OSC or Representative)  
  
  Received and acknowledged: 
  
  
  (Name of Addressee), (Date/Time)             Witness:  (Name), Date/Time)   
 
  
  
  7.B.4.a.(1)      (c)  Minimize the cost of labor, equipment, and materials and 
                        rapidly secure those resources that are no longer needed. 
  
              (2)  Managing A Commercial Contractor .  The OSC shall, whenever 
                   possible, use contractors having current Basic Ordering 
                   Agreements (BOA's) with the district commander (fcp) (see 
                   Commandant Instruction (COMDTINST) 4200.14 (series)).  Consult 
                   with the district contracting officer when a contractor is not 
                   under a BOA.  In all cases, the OSC must known the contractor's 
                   capabilities.  The selection shall be based on the OSC's 
                   determination of the lowest cost contractor capable of performing 
                   the job in a timely manner, not solely on a rotation schedule or 
                   other method.  The OSC shall specify the needed cleanup resources 
                   and authorize the contractor to proceed in writing or verbally, 
                   with a written follow-up.  Documentation of contractor costs is 
                   described in subparagraph 7.B.6.c.(2) below.  Operations 
                   performed at the scene of a federally-funded spill that are not 
                   authorized by the OSC will not be paid from the Pollution Fund. 
  
              (3)  Use Of Coast Guard Unit Equipment .  Each OSC shall maintain 
                   levels of "first aid" oil pollution response equipment as 
                   determined through the contingency planning process; however, it 
                   is the Coast Guard's policy not to compete with the commercial 
                   sector.  Consistent with this policy, the use of Coast Guard 
                   equipment is appropriate only when: 
  
                   (a)  It can be used in a more timely fashion than commercially 
                        available equipment; 
  
                   (b)  It includes a necessary containment or removal device that 
                        cannot be reasonably obtained from commercial sources; or 
  
                   (c)  It will significantly enhance removal activities. 
  
                   COMDTINST 7310 (series) establishes standard rates to compute 
                   charges for Coast Guard pollution response equipment.  Questions 
                   concerning these rates or the determination of other charges 
                   should be addressed to Commandant (G-FAC-6).  Whenever the OSC 
                   must utilize Coast Guard-owned equipment for purposes other than 
                   monitoring, the OSC shall declare a federally-funded removal to 
                   the extent necessary to ensure effective removal of pollutants. 
                   Upon arrival of commercial equipment, Coast Guard-owned equipment 
                   should be removed, provided a smooth transition can be made. 
                   Additional guidance on the administration and use of Coast 
 
############
  
  
  7.B.4.a.    (4)  (cont'd)  properly conducting removal operations is a 
                   prerequisite for reimbursement of state removal expenses. 
                   Without a Section 311(c)(1) determination by the OSC prior to  
                   initiation of response actions, a state cannot obtain 
                   reimbursement for costs incurred in those activities.  In 
                   addition, the OSC must determine that state removal actions are 
                   necessary.  The OSC may authorize state removal actions when the 
                   state can minimize or mitigate significant damage which federal 
                   removal actions cannot, or when the cost incurred by the state 
                   will be less than, or not significantly greater than, that 
                   incurred by federal departments or agencies (NCP, 40 CFR 
                   300.58).  Also, since the OSC must certify that the activities of 
                   the state and the corresponding expenses were authorized, the OSC 
                   must maintain an appropriate level of supervision over state 
                   response actions.  Only expenses prepaid from state funds may be 
                   considered for reimbursement.  This policy recognizes the 
                   responsibility of the OSC to determine the propriety of any 
                   removal actions taken by the party responsible for the discharge, 
                   and allows the OSC to maintain effective control over removal 
                   activities in the OSC's geographic area of responsibility.  Care 
                   must be exercised in a state removal operation to ensure that 
                   misunderstandings do not develop concerning reimbursement of 
                   funds expended for removal activities.  State resources are to be 
                   used in accordance with formal agreements established among 
                   federal departments and agencies, the state, and the Coast 
                   Guard.  These agreements should describe the mechanisms governing 
                   state reimbursement from the Pollution Fund for reimbursable 
                   activities listed in 33 CFR 153.407.  To remain consistent with 
                   the policy on use of the 311(k) fund for hazardous substance 
                   removals, as described in section 7.B.7.a below, all agreements 
                   should be limited to oil discharge removal actions.  The 
                   procedures for coordinated federal and state response activities 
                   should be included in the RCP.  A sample agreement with a state 
                   agency is shown in Figure 7-5. 
  
              (5)  Use Of Other Federal Agencies .  The OSC shall be familiar with 
                   existing Memorandums of Understanding (MOU's) and Interagency 
                   Agreements (IAA's) that describe the responsibilities and 
                   expectations of participating agencies during response 
                   operations.  Figure 7-6 contains a list of existing MOU's and 
                   IAA's pertaining to pollution response (volume X (TO BE 
                   DEVELOPED) of this manual will contain copies of these documents). 
  
          b.  Accessing The FWPCA 311(k) Pollution Fund .  The OSC shall promptly 
              request the issuance of a project number from the district Fund 
              Administrator for all federally-funded removals (see paragraph 7.B.7 
              below concerning use of the Fund).  The OSC will provide the following 
              information with the project number request: 
  
              (1)  The amount of obligation needed; 
  
              (2)  The name of the discharger, if known or suspected; 
 
 
 
FIGURE 7-5 
 
SAMPLE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND THE STATE OF _______ 
CONCERNING REIMBURSEMENT FROM THE FEDERAL POLLUTION FUND 
 
WHEREAS, the state of _______, through its (state agency), and the U.S. 
Coast Guard, through its ____ Coast Guard District, have a mutual interest in 
protecting the environment from the damaging effects of oil pollution discharged 
into the navigable waters of the United States and the adjoining shorelines within 
their mutual jurisdictions; and 
 
############
WHEREAS, the Coast Guard is authorized by the Federal Water Pollution Control 
Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), hereinafter called the "Act," and the 
National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (40 CFR 300), 
hereinafter called the "National Contingency Plan," to reimburse state agencies 
from the Federal Pollution Fund under certain circumstances in which the Federal 
 
 
 
FIGURE 7-5 (cont'd) 
 
(2)(cont'd)  be appropriate in circumstances in which federal action is not deemed 
necessary by the OSC.  Activities of (state agency), other state agencies, 
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions may include expenditure of state 
funds which under other circumstances would be reimbursable, or expenditures 
(such as restoration expenses) which are not reimbursable from the Pollution Fund. 
 
(3) The OSC may inquire of the designated representative of (state agency) what, 
if any, equipment, personnel, or materials of (state agency), other state agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions are available for use hereunder.  The designated representative shall inform the OSC of what items, if any, are available and to what extent, if any, (state agency) desires to assume a portion of the responsibility for Phase III actions during a particular oil pollution incident, and the estimated costs of such actions. 
 
(4) Upon determination by the OSC that all of the following conditions have been 
met, he or she may authorize (state agency) to proceed with certain work to contain, clean up, and remove oil deposited upon the navigable waters of the United States or on adjacent shorelines or beaches: 
 
(a) That the party causing the discharge is unknown; or that the responsible 
party has been notified, if possible, of his or her liability for the costs of federal removal in accordance with Section 311(f) or (g) of the Act, the need to perform the removal in accordance with existing federal and state statutes and regulations, including the National Contingency 
Plan, and the name and availability Of the OSC; 
 
(b) That, despite these efforts by the OSC or other officials, the responsible 
party does not act promptly and adequately to remove the discharge; and 
 
(c) That state action is required to minimize or mitigate significant damage 
to the public health and welfare which federal action cannot minimize or 
mitigate; or that state action can be effected at a cost not significantly greater than that which would be incurred through action by federal agencies. 
 
(5) If the OSC determines that the conditions of paragraph (4) have been met and 
that state action is necessary, he or she may authorize thedesignated representative of (state agency) to proceed with the performance of 
appropriate services.  This notice to proceed may be limited in any fashion 
and may be terminated at any time by the OSC, in whole or in part, by written or oral notice to the designated representative. 
 
(6) All labor and equipment offered by the designated representative of (state 
agency) and authorized for use by the OSC shall be performed using the employees of (state agency), other state agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, unless the provisions of paragraph (8) of this 
 
############
 
 
FIGURE 7-5 (cont'd) 
 
(6)(cont'd) agreement are met in contracting private concerns.  All authorized 
work shall be supervised by the designated representative of (state agency).  
Work authorized hereunder, whether rendered by (state agency), other state 
agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions shall be paid for by 
state or local appropriations and shall be considered, for the purpose of this agreement, as work rendered by (state agency).  If the service of private contractors is deemed necessary by the designated representative of (state agency), those services will be obtained from concerns under contract to the United States, or through the ____ Coast Guard District contracting officer. 
 
(7) (State agency) shall be reimbursed for the following costs incurred hereunder 
and paid for by state or local appropriations, upon the submission of a report supported by accounting data, itemizing the actual costs incurred, to the Commander, ____ Coast Guard District via the OSC: 
 
(a)  Costs found reasonable by the Coast Guard and incurred by government 
 
 
 
FIGURE 7-5 (cont'd) 
 
(8)(a)  (cont'd)  this clause, purchase of raw materials or commercial stock 
          items shall not be considered "work." 
 
(b) No subcontract placed by (state agency) hereunder shall provide for 
payment on a cost-plus-percentage-of-cost basis. 
 
(9) All individual requests for services hereunder shall be made by order of the 
OSC.  Oral orders shall be confirmed in writing.  (State agency) shall issue 
daily work orders to its labor force, and shall prepare daily (in a manner acceptable to Commander, ____ Coast Guard District (f)) a complete list of personnel, equipment, and materials provided hereunder, the inclusive times of their employment, and their costs if known, or an accurate estimate thereof if actual costs are not ascertainable.  The list shall be sufficiently itemized 
to permit the OSC to maintain an accurate record of actual or estimated costs 
for each category of activity, and to identify each item of work for which 
actual costs will be included in the final billing.  For minor incidents, the OSC may require less frequent reports at intervals not longer than three (3) days.  Each daily report should also include an estimate of the percentage of work completed, an estimate of expenses necessary to complete removal activities, and remarks concerning any unusual problems encountered or anticipated. 
 
(10) Hourly charges under paragraph (7) shall commence with the time personnel and 
equipment depart for the scene of the oil pollution incident, excluding any diversions.  Charges shall terminate at the conclusion of necessary cleanup activities and transportation of personnel and equipment to their respective bases of operation; or, in the case of a notice of termination of 
authorization to proceed on certain work issued by the OSC, after the time 
which would have been necessary for cleanup activities and return transportation, had the work been terminated at the time of the notice. 
 
(11) If it is deemed in the best public interest, the United States reserves the 
right to request cleanup services simultaneously from competitive firms and 
will expect harmonious cooperation from the various contractors working in the same or adjacent areas.  The apportionment of contractors' services will lie solely within the discretion of the OSC, and no guarantee of volume of requested services shall be intended or implied. 
 
############
(12) Services provided hereunder by (state agency) shall be in accordance with the 
following general provisions: 
 
(a) No member of or delegate to Congress, or resident commissioner, shall be 
admitted to any part or share of this contract, or to any benefit that may arise herefrom; but this provision shall not be construed to extend to this contract if made with a corporation for its general benefit. 
 
(b) (State agency) warrants that no person or selling agency has been employed 
or retained to solicit or secure this agreement upon an 
 
 
 
FIGURE 7-5 (cont'd) 
 
(12)(b) (cont'd)  agreement or understanding for a commission, percentage, 
brokerage, or contingent fee, excepting bona fide employees or bona fide 
established commercial or selling agencies maintained by (state agency) 
for the purpose of securing business.  For breach or violation of this 
warranty, the Government shall reserve the right to annul this agreement without liability or to deduct from the contract price or consideration, or otherwise recover, the full amount of such commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee. 
 
(c) The parties to this contract act in an independent capacity in the 
performance of their respective functions under the provisions of this contract, and neither party is deemed the officer, agent, or employee of the other.  [NOTE:  Other provisions may be added as necessary.] 
 
(13) This agreement shall go into force thirty (30) days after signing by both 
parties to the agreement. 
 
  
           __________________________________   ______________________________ 
           (Name and title, U.S. Coast Guard)   (Name and title, state agency) 
  
  
                    _________________                   ______________ 
                          (Date)                            (Date) 
 
 
 
FIGURE 7-6 
 
MEMORANDUMS OF UNDERSTANDING AND INTERAGENCY AGREEMENTS 
PERTAINING TO POLLUTION RESPONSE 
  
      1.  USCG-EPA:  Mitigating of Damage to the Public Health or Welfare Caused by a 
          Discharge of Hazardous Substances Under Section 311 of the Clean Water Act. 
          (3 OCT 1979) 
  
      2.  Department of Transportation (DOT)-EPA:  Redelegation of Certain Pollution 
          Response Functions Under CERCLA or SUPERFUND.  (9 OCT 1981) 
  
      3.  USCG-EPA:  A Mechanism for Funding Vendor Costs Incurred by the U.S. Coast 
          Hazardous Substances.  (4 JAN 1982)           Guard During Emergency Response to Releases or Threats of Releases of 
  
      4.  USCG-U.S. Geological Survey (USGS):  Regulation of Activities and Facilities 
          on the Outer Continental Shelf of the United States.  (18 DEC 1980) 
  
      5.  USCG-U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (F&WS):  Participation in Pollution 
          Incidents.  (24 JUL 1979) 
  
      6.  USCG-National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
 
  
  
  7.B.4.b.    (3)  The location of the discharge and water body involved; 
  
              (4)  The cleanup contractor selected; and 
  
              (5)  The time cleanup commenced and estimated duration. 
  
              The OSC shall ensure that expenditures from the fund remain within the 
              limit of the expenditure authorization.  Requests to increase 
              authorized expenditures must be promptly communicated to the district 
              Fund Administrator, following procedures in Annex G of the District 
              Operation Plan (OPLAN). 
  
          c.  Supervising Federally-Funded Removal Operations .  The OSC shall 
              supervise all operations supported by federal funds directly.  In all 
 
  
  
  7.B.5.  d.  Activities required to repair unavoidable damage resulting from 
              removal actions have been performed. 
  
      6.  Documenting The Response . 
  
          a.  General.  Pollution incident documentation serves to: 
  
              (1)  Inform response personnel at other organizational levels and 
                   agencies, through the mechanism of pollution report (POLREP) 
                   messages; . 
  
############
              (2)  Provides the evidentiary basis to support the imposition of civil 
                   or criminal sanctions (see volume V of this manual); 
  
              (3)  Document federal expenditures for recovering costs from the 
                   responsible party; 
  
              (4)  Document OSC decisions and actions throughout the incident; and 
  
              (5)  Forecast program resource levels needed for pollution response. 
  
              Each OSC shall comply with the documentation requirements listed below 
              in addition to those detailed in volume V of this manual. 
  
          b.  Reports Required For Every Incident . 
  
              (1)  POLREPS.  POLREPS are required for every spill or potential 
                   spill.  The COTP shall submit a POLREP for each reported incident 
                   to the district commander, with information copies to appropriate 
                   agencies; subsequent POLREPS should be sent as significant 
                   developments occur.  The NRC and Commandant (G-WER) shall be 
                   information addressees on all messages reporting medium or major 
                   spills as defined in the NCP (40 CFR 300.6) for oil, and in 
                   paragraph 7.C.7 below for hazardous substances.  Figure 7-7 
                   provides a general POLREP format. 
  
              (2)  MSIS Marine Pollution Product Set (MSIS-MP) .  Data entries shall 
                   be made in the MSIS-MP whenever:  a report is received of a 
                   discharge or release in a location where the Coast Guard acts as 
                   predesignated OSC; Coast Guard forces respond to a discharge or 
                   release as OSC or as first federal official; or Coast Guard 
                   forces respond at the request of an EPA or Department of Defense 
                   (DOD) OSC when those agencies are the predesignated OSC. 
                   Detailed instructions for entering MSIS-MP data is located in 
                   COMDTINST M5230.18 and its enclosure, the Marine Pollution 
                   Transaction Guide (MSIS-8). 
  
              (3)  Port And Environmental Safety (PES)/Marine Environmental Response  
                   (MER) Quarterly Activities Report (QAR), Form CG-4957 , 
 
  
  
                                 FIGURE 7-7 
  
                            GENERAL POLREP FORMAT 
  
  (PRECEDENCE/DTG) 
  FM 
  TO 
  INFO [*1] 
  ACCT CG-W2GZZZ 
  BT 
  UNCLAS//N16465// 
  POLREP (#)   (Type of Pollutant)    (Magnitude of Spill [*2]) 
  (Source [*3]                    (Waterway/s involved) 
  (Unit case number)             (Federal Project Number (FPN), if applicable [*4] 
  1.  SITUATION 
  A.  (Local time and notification information).  Give names and telephone number or 
  radio frequency. 
  B.  (Local time when investigator is on scene).  Give description of spill and 
  status of cleanup.  For federally-funded response operations, include the latest 
  estimate of funds expended. 
  C.  (On-scene weather conditions). 
  D.  (Particulars of vessels/facilities involved). 
  2.  ACTION. 
  A.  (List chronologically every major action taken by the Coast Guard with regard 
  to spill). 
  3.  PLANS/RECOMMENDATIONS. 
  A.  (Give appropriate information). 
  4.  CASE PENDS/CLOSED.  (NO) VIOLATION REPORT TO FOLLOW (OR REASON WHY NO 
  VIOLATION REPORT TO FOLLOW). 
  
  NOTES:  1.  Routing should be as specified in the RCP.  In addition, include the 
              NRC and Commandant (G-WER) as info addressees on actual or potential  
              medium and major spills only .  Include EPA Headquarters Emergency 
              Response Division (TWX #710-8229269) and Commandant (G-WER) as info 
              addressees on all spills with CERCLA-funded removals. 
  
          2.  Magnitude of spill:  potential, minor, medium, or major. 
  
          3.  Source:  Name of vessel or facility believed to be source.  For 
              foreign vessels, include nationality. 
  
          4.  Federal Project Number (FPN):  311(k) Account # or CERCLA Account #. 
 
  
  
  7.B.6.b.    (3)  (cont'd) serves as the basis for operational analysis, 
                   facilities planning, and budget programming for Coast Guard units 
                   performing response activities.  Directions for preparing and 
                   submitting the form are contained in the instruction. 
  
############
          c.  Documentation Required For Federally-Funded Removal Actions .  Each 
              Coast Guard OSC shall maintain daily records and associated costs of 
              all personnel, equipment, supplies, and services used during federal 
              removal actions.  Also, know the types of activities that are 
              reimbursable to a federal or state agency from the Section 311(k) 
              Pollution Fund described in paragraph 7.B.7 below, and document these 
              activities accordingly.  As the basis for cost recovery from the 
              polluter and proper administration of the fund, the accuracy of 
              documentation pertaining to federal expenses incurred during removal 
              operations cannot be overemphasized. 
  
              (1)  Documenting Contractor Costs . 
  
                   (a)  Daily Work Orders .  Each Coast Guard OSC shall issue daily 
                        work orders to the contractor for the next day's work 
                        specifying authorized work force and equipment, precedence 
                        for jobs and locations, and special instructions. 
                        Responsible Coast Guard supervisors will ensure compliance 
                        with these orders and, if necessary, recommend changes to 
                        the OSC. 
  
                   (b)  Pollution Control Contractor Daily Report, Form CG-5136 . 
                        Form CG-5136 shall be completed by the OSC's representative 
                        supervising the site of operations.  The form shall show all 
                        personnel and equipment employed at the scene.  Overtime 
                        work performed by the contractor or subcontractor must be 
                        preauthorized by the OSC and recorded on the form.  Also, 
                        record all quantities of recovered product and specify 
                        quantities suitable for sale or reclamation.  The OSC's copy 
                        of the form shall be signed by the contractor and maintained 
                        for verification of contractor invoices.  It is generally 
                        recommended that the OSC's supervisor at each scene of 
                        operations complete the form for activity at that site.  The 
                        information required on the form shall be based on activity 
                        logs maintained throughout the day.  Frequent comparison 
                        with the contractor foreman's records will minimize and help 
                        resolve discrepancies in preparing the form. 
  
                   (c)  OSC Certification Of Invoices .  Timely certification of the 
                        invoices submitted by contractors will enable them to 
                        minimize their debt level, and will enable the Coast Guard 
                        to recover cleanup costs more effectively.  Each invoice 
                        certified must bear, or be an enclosure to a statement from 
                        the OSC that the invoice has been reviewed.  The format for 
                        this certification shall be provided by the district 
                        commander.  As a minimum, it shall contain the statement 
 
  
  
  7.B.6.c.(1)      (c)  (cont'd) 
  
                             "I certify that [except as noted below] the services 
                             and materials were authorized and received by me in 
                             conjunction with Phase III oil removal actions, and 
                             reasonable costs related thereto are proper for 
                             payment from the Pollution Fund.  [The following 
                             services and materials were not authorized by me and 
                             are not proper for payment from the Pollution Fund.]" 
  
                        and shall be signed by the OSC.  Charges for time and 
                        materials not properly recorded on Form CG-5136 shall not be 
                        certified by the OSC for payment unless a discrepancy 
                        between the final invoice and the form is clearly due to 
                        Coast Guard error.  On each invoice, the OSC shall state 
                        that the services and materials (except as noted) were 
                        authorized and received during removal actions.  The OSC 
                        shall promptly forward certified invoices to the district 
                        commander for verification that costs charged are reasonable 
                        and payable from the fund. 
  
############
              (2)  State And Other Federal Agency Costs .  Federal and state agencies 
                   shall submit records of expenses for activities performed to the 
                   district commander via the OSC.  It is recommended that the OSC 
                   use Form CG-5136 to document daily personnel and equipment used 
                   by other agencies.  Based on these daily records, the OSC shall 
                   certify requests for reimbursement from other federal or state 
                   agencies in the format shown in 33 CFR 153.417(b)(1) or (2).  The 
                   OSC shall promptly submit certified records to the district 
                   commander and maintain copies to prepare the cost summary sheets. 
  
              (3)  Cost Summary Report .  Within 30 days following the completion of 
                   removal operations at a federally-funded removal, the OSC shall 
                   submit a cost summary report documenting expenses recoverable 
                   from the polluter, and payments made from the Pollution Fund to 
                   contractors and federal or state agencies (see paragraph 7.B.7 
                   below).  This cost summary report should include a brief summary 
                   of the response and a general description of the function 
                   performed by each agency or contractor with costs incurred.  This 
                   response summary is not required if an OSC report is also 
                   completed for an incident (see subparagraph 7.B.6.d below). 
                   Requests for reimbursement of Coast Guard out-of-pocket expenses 
                   should be submitted following district procedures. 
  
                   (a)  Costs Reimbursable To The Pollution Fund .  These are costs 
                        recoverable from the polluter.  As specified in the 
                        Comptroller Manual (COMDTINST M7300.4 (Series)), Volume I, 
                        summarize estimated expenditures into the following 
                        categories: 
  
                        (i)  Access control costs; 
 
  
  
  7.B.6.c.(3)(a)        (ii)  Coast Guard-owned equipment; 
  
                        (iii) Coast Guard personnel; 
  
                        (iv)  Travel, per diem, contracted quarters, and subsistence; 
  
                        (v)   Purchase orders; 
  
                        (vi)  Contractor costs; 
  
                        (vii) State and other federal agency costs; and 
  
                       (viii) Pollution removal damage claims (see Chapter 14, 
                              COMDTINST M5890.9). 
  
                        Figure 7-8 describes each category.  A sample cost summary 
                        report is shown in Figure 7-9.  Documentation to support all 
                        costs included in the cost summary report should be included 
                        as an enclosure to that report.  This documentation would 
                        include all daily work orders; Pollution Control Contractor 
                        Daily Reports, Form CG-5136; boat/aircraft or personnel 
                        logs; purchase orders and/or contracts; invoices; 
                        notifications to suspected dischargers, including notice of 
                        federal interest and notice of federal assumption; and any 
                        other documentation that supports the costs included in the 
                        report. 
  
                   (b)  Payments From The Pollution Fund .  Summarize payments that 
                        have been made from the Pollution Fund to pay contractor 
                        invoices or reimburse agency expenditures as a result of the 
                        incident.  Do not duplicate the detailed documentation 
                        supporting the recoverable costs indicated above; it is 
                        sufficient to list payments made and proof of payment. 
                        Payments from the fund will be summarized as follows: 
  
                        (i)   Travel, per diem, contracted quarters; 
  
                        (ii)  Operational costs for removal and support equipment; 
  
                        (iii) Personnel costs (nonresponse personnel, etc.); 
  
                        (iv)  Purchase orders; 
  
                        (v)   Contractor costs; 
  
                        (vi)  State and other federal agency costs; and 
  
                        (vii) Pollution removal damage claims (see 33 CFR 25, 
                              Subpart H). 
 
 
 
FIGURE 7-8 
 
OSC PREPARATION OF COST SUMMARY SHEETS 
  
  Supporting documentation for each category below should indicate that the costs 
  incurred are directly related to the removal effort.  Where applicable, state 
  exact dates and hours of personnel and equipment use.  Use COMDTINST 7310 (Series) 
  to compute standard rates for Coast Guard personnel and equipment.  More detailed 
  guidance on the costs included in each of the below categories is found in the 
  Comptroller Manual (COMDTINST M7300.4), Volume I.  Figure 7-9 contains examples of 
  each summary sheet category. 
  
############
  CATEGORY     DESCRIPTION  
  
  ACCESS CONTROL  Expenses for limiting access to an area including vessel 
  COSTS           traffic services (VTS).  Summarize the reason for limiting access 
                  prior to itemizing the costs of establishing, maintaining, 
                  replacing, and removing equipment for limiting access. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 7-9 
 
SAMPLE COST SUMMARY SHEET ENTRIES 
  
  The following is an example of a cost summary sheet for a medium oil pollution 
  incident.  It is intended only to provide an example of the types of information 
  to be included in each section of the sheet.  It is important to note that 
  documentation to support each category of the cost summary sheet must be attached 
  to the sheet. 
  
  
                             M/V CLEAN SWEEP 
                              PIC 1-0-0098 
  
  The following is a summary of the costs incurred during the federal removal action 
  initiated by COTP Houston for a 16,000 gallon #2 oil spill from the M/V CLEAN 
  SWEEP into Houston Ship Channel on 13 May 1986.  Expenses totalling an estimated 
  $108,413.39 are reimbursable to the Pollution Fund.  Approximately $44,335.01 was 
  paid from the Pollution Fund to finance the response.  These expenses are noted by 
  an asterisk. 
  
  1.  Access Control .  The following costs were incurred for enforcing a safety zone 
  that was established by COTP Houston to control marine traffic in the vicinity of 
  cleanup activities resulting from the oil discharge from the M/V CLEAN SWEEP. 
  This safety zone was in effect from 13 - 15 May 1986.  Detailed documentation of 
  boat hours is available from COTP Houston boat logs (copies attached). 
  
      32 ft. PWB                    37 hrs. @ $315          $11,655.00 
      CGC POINT HERRON              28 hrs. @ $274           $7,672.00 
  
  TOTAL ACCESS CONTROL COST                                          $19,327.00 
  
  2.  USCG Equipment Expenses .  The following expenses were incurred by COTP 
  Houston, the Gulf Strike Team, and AIRSTA Houston during the response to the oil 
  discharge from the M/V CLEAN SWEEP.  These costs were incurred in providing 
  transportation for Coast Guard personnel to and from the scene of the incident, to 
  conduct overflights of the affected area, and to support Gulf Strike Team response 
  equipment that was used due to the unavailability of commercial equipment. 
  Detailed documentation is available from COTP Houston vehicle logs, AIRSTA Houston 
  logs, and the Gulf Strike Team Incident Summary (copies attached). 
  
      Aircraft  
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-9 (cont'd) 
  
  2.  USCG Equipment Expenses  (cont'd) 
  
      Oil Pollution Response Equipment  
          ADAPTS                      8 hrs. @ $103             $824.00 
          Skimming Barrier            8 hrs. @ $146           $1,168.00 
          Biomarine O(2)/CGI          12 hrs. @ $7               $84.00 
  
  TOTAL USCG EQUIPMENT EXPENSES                                        $41,471.38 
  
  3.  Personnel Expenses .  The costs listed below cover the personnel from COTP 
  Houston and the Gulf Strike Team that were involved in supervising the federal 
  removal activities or operating Coast Guard response equipment.  Detailed 
  documentation for these costs is available in the daily work logs (copies 
  attached). 
  
      Regular 
          LT SMITH                    21 hrs. @ $32             $672.00 
          MK1 JONES                   26 hrs. @ $22             $572.00 
          MST2 POPE                   26 hrs. @ $15             $390.00 
          BM3 SCOTT                   16 hrs. @ $15             $240.00 
  
      Strike Team  
          MKC JOHNS                   19 hrs. @ $22             $418.00 
          BM1 JONES                   19 hrs. @ $22             $418.00 
          BM2 JACKSON                 19 hrs. @ $15             $285.00 
          MK2 STEVENS                 19 hrs. @ $15             $285.00 
  
############
      Reserve TEMAC  
          None 
  
      Civilian  
          None 
  
  TOTAL PERSONNEL COSTS                                                 $3,280.00 
  
  4.  Travel And Per Diem Expenses .  The following expenses were incurred by the 
  Gulf Strike Team personnel that were deployed away from their home unit to operate 
  Coast Guard-owned pollution response equipment.  Documentation to support these 
  expenses is attached. 
  
      15 May 1986       MKC JOHNS      TONO D628143             $238.12 
      15 May 1986       BM1 JONES      TONO D628144             $238.12 
      15 May 1986       BM2 JACKSON    TONO D628145             $238.12 
      15 May 1986       MK2 STEVENS    TONO D628146             $238.12 
  
  TOTAL TRAVEL AND PER DIEM EXPENSES                                      $952.48* 
  
  5.  Purchase Orders .  The following expenses were incurred purchasing small 
  equipment items expended during the response to the oil spill from the M/V CLEAN 
  SWEEP.  Copies of contracts and SF-44's that document these purchases are attached. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 7-9 (cont'd) 
 
  5.  Purchase Orders  (cont'd) 
  
      13 May 1986       Joe's Boat Works         PO #37-5560     $37.50 
      14 May 1986       Frank's Junk Shop        PO #37-5567     $50.00 
  
  TOTAL PURCHASE ORDER EXPENSES                                            $87.50* 
  
  6.  Contract Costs .  The following costs were incurred by contractors conducting 
  oil removal operations under contract to the Coast Guard resulting from the spill 
  from the M/V CLEAN SWEEP.  Documentation to support these costs include contracts, 
  contractor invoices, daily work sheets, daily work orders, and other associated 
  documents (copies attached). 
  
          Firm/Contract Number                     Invoice Received, Certified, and 
                                                   Forwarded to District 
  
          Ajax Oil Pollution Service                         $37,512.15 
              DTCG 08-15788 
 
  
  
  7.B.6.  d.  Reports Of Major Pollution Incidents .  The NCP requires the OSC to 
              submit an OSC Report to the RRT and NRT, via Commandant (G-WER), 
              within 60 days of completion of removal operations for all major 
              pollution incidents, or when requested by the RRT.  The district 
              commander shall ensure that a copy of the OSC's report for each major 
              pollution incident is forwarded, with appropriate endorsements, to 
              Commandant (G-WER) and the cognizant strike team(s) within 75 days of 
              the conclusion of the incident.  Reports for other than major 
              incidents, should be submitted to Commandant (G-WER) whenever the 
              reports contain information that may be useful for general program 
              planning.  The format should include the information specified in the 
              NCP (40 CFR 300.40), with the following information as enclosures: 
  
              (1)  Maps, charts, or diagrams of the areas affected by the spill; 
  
              (2)  MSIS-MP screen images; 
  
              (3)  All POLREPS: 
  
              (4)  Radio, telephone, and other applicable logs; 
  
              (5)  Copy of cost summary report (for federally-funded removal); 
  
              (6)  Photographic documentation of response, arranged chronologically; 
                   and 
  
              (7)  Any other documentation necessary to supplement the information 
                   contained in the OSC report. 
  
          e.  District Requirements .  District (mep) offices should review all 
              documentation forwarded by OSC's for completeness and accuracy.  They 
              should also act as the consolidation point for all documentation 
              applicable to a federally-funded removal action for use in cost 
              recovery activities.  The information at the district office should 
              include the OSC report (when applicable), the cost summary report, all 
              documentation that supports the costs incurred on the case, any FWPCA 
              violation reports and associated civil or criminal penalty 
              correspondence, any officer in charge, marine inspection (OCMI)/COTP 
              investigations and/or proceedings arising from the case, and any other 
              documentation related to the case that may be necessary to support 
              cost recovery actions. 
  
############
      7.  Use Of The FWPCA 311(k) Pollution Fund . 
  
          a.  General.  The primary purpose of the Pollution Fund is to provide a 
              source for financing federal removal operations when an oil discharger 
              is unknown, does not act promptly, or is unwilling to undertake 
              necessary response actions.  The types of activities that may be 
              charged to the Pollution Fund have been subject to varying 
              interpretation.  Discovery, notification, and monitoring expenses are 
              considered operating expenses of the Coast Guard.  Although the cost  
              of monitoring is a cost of doing business  when the discharger takes 
 
  
  
  7.B.7.  a.  (cont'd) responsibility, the cost of supervising federal removal 
              efforts is chargeable to the discharger, and under certain conditions 
              reimbursable to an agency, when a federal assumption of control is 
              made.  33 CFR 153.407 lists response activities that may be funded by 
              the Pollution Fund, either by direct payment from the fund or through 
              reimbursement to a federal or state agency.  [NOTE:  Direct payment 
              may not be made to state contractors.]  Normal pollution response 
              operating expenses, such as response personnel salaries and equipment 
              maintenance, cannot be reimbursed from the fund.  These costs, 
              however, in addition to all expenses incurred during federal removal 
              operations, are recoverable from the polluter.  Figure 7-10 summarizes 
              the types of expenses that are reimbursable from the Fund and/or 
              recoverable from the polluter.  It is the responsibility of each 
              NRT/RRT member agency to plan and formally assign employees to perform 
              discharge response duties as a matter of routine.  However, if a 
              particular pollution incident requires agency personnel not normally 
              detailed to respond to perform response duties, the normal salaries of 
              such personnel are subject to reimbursement from the Pollution Fund. 
              The sole purpose of this policy is to provide the OSC with access to 
              assistance from agencies that are unable to assign their personnel to 
              response duties unless their salaries are reimbursed.  An example 
              would be certain personnel in the F&WS who, although they are F&WS 
              employees, are in a position totally funded by the U.S. Army Corps of 
              Engineers (USACE) and fully committed to a USACE-sponsored task.  If 
              those personnel are withdrawn from the USACE-sponsored task to assist 
              in response activities, their salaries must be paid through other 
              means during the time they are diverted.  As a general rule, the 
              311(k) Fund shall not be used for response to hazardous substance 
              incidents.  Although there are some situations where the Pollution 
              Fund could be used to fund removal costs (e.g., the discharge of a 
              substance listed in 40 CFR 117 into navigable waters), the Coast Guard 
              and EPA have agreed that, whenever possible, the CERCLA Trust Fund 
              will be used for hazardous substance response.  In any case, the 
              311 (k) fund shall not be used for response to hazardous incidents 
              without prior Commandant (G-WER) approval.  Subparagraphs 7.B.7.b and 
              c below cite specific expenditures that are reimbursable from the fund 
              and/or recoverable from the polluter.  To ensure proper use of the 
              fund, the following policies shall also apply: 
  
              (1)  The Pollution Fund may not fund the removal of pollutants 
                   discharged from a vessel or facility owned or operated by the 
                   United States.  The OSC may, however, use the fund for removal 
                   operations when the discharge is from an unknown or a nonfederal 
                   source and impacts federal lands or property.  In addition, the 
                   Coast Guard may fund cleanup actions involving a public vessel or 
                   federal activity from the Operating Expense Appropriation, using 
                   the OG-80.00 reimbursement technique, when requested by the 
                   responsible federal agency, or when the urgency of the situation 
                   demands immediate action (see COMDTINST M7300.4, Comptrollers 
                   Manual). 
 
############
 
 
FIGURE 7-10 
 
REIMBURSABLE/RECOVERABLE EXPENSES UNDER THE FWPCA 
 
  
  
  7.B.7.a.    (2)  No agency's expenses are reimbursable unless a federal removal 
                   activity has been declared, the fund has been activated, and 
                   those agency services have been requested by the OSC.  In the 
                   case of a partial federal removal, only those expenses incurred 
                   specifically to support the federal removal activity are 
                   reimbursable. 
  
              (3)  Federal agency salaries shall not be reimbursed if such a 
                   transaction would result in transfer of funds from the Pollution 
                   Fund to the U.S. Treasury (General Fund). 
  
              (4)  The Pollution Fund may be used to procure nonexpendable equipment 
                   when the OSC determines it is necessary for the removal. 
                   Requests for procurement of nonexpendable equipment shall be 
                   transmitted to the district commander prior to purchase. 
  
              (5)  Federal and state agencies are entitled to replacement or repair 
                   costs for nonexpendable equipment that is damaged while under the 
                   administrative control of the OSC, provided the damage did not 
                   occur as a result of negligence on the part of the parent agency 
                   or its appointed agent.  It is not intended, however, that the 
                   Pollution Fund be used to replace the normal budget process by 
                   funding replacement of major acquisition items which are 
                   accidentally damaged (e.g., an aircraft crashes during support 
                   operations for a response activity). 
  
              (6)  Normally, federal agencies should use their own funds, subject to 
                   reimbursement from the Pollution Fund.  The OSC may, however, 
                   authorize the procurement of supplies, equipment, or services 
                   with costs charged directly to the fund. 
  
              (7)  Damage assessment studies, other than those the OSC determines 
                   are necessary to conduct a proper removal (e.g., efforts to 
                   identify environmentally sensitive areas or evaluate alternate 
                   defensive measures), are not chargeable to the Pollution Fund. 
  
              (8)  Salaries of Coast Guard Reserve personnel called to active duty 
                   specifically to assist in a federal removal activity are 
                   reimbursable.  Cases in which Reservists are likely to be 
                   employed would be those having an acute need for additional 
                   personnel (e.g., a large discharge area in which a great number 
                   of supervisors are required).  However, while it may be desirable 
                   to utilize Reserve personnel to supplement the OSC staff for 
                   other than discharge-related duties during a particular incident, 
                   or to monitor the cleanup actions of responsible parties, 
                   salaries of such employment are not reimbursable from the 
                   Pollution Fund.  Further, it is inappropriate to attempt to 
                   alleviate chronic shortages of personnel within the Coast Guard 
                   or other federal agencies through the use of the Pollution Fund. 
  
              (9)  To receive reimbursement and to provide proper documentation for 
                   cost recovery, each agency is responsible for providing 
 
  
  
  7.B.7.a.    (9)  (cont'd)  documentation to the OSC in the manner prescribed by 
                   the Pollution Fund administrator (the Coast Guard).  Procedures 
                   compatible with these requirements, which will enhance 
                   coordinated federal response activities, shall be included in the 
                   RCP. 
  
          b.  Reimbursable Activities .  The following types of removal costs 
              incurred by federal or state agencies and authorized by the OSC may be 
              reimbursed from the Pollution Fund: 
  
              (1)  Costs incurred by government industrial facilities, including 
                   charges for overhead; 
  
############
              (2)  Actual costs for which an agency is required or authorized by law 
                   to obtain full reimbursement; and 
  
              (3)  Costs incurred during removal activities not normally funded by 
                   regular appropriations, including: 
  
                   (a)  Transportation costs incurred in delivering equipment to and 
                        from the scene; 
  
                   (b)  Travel and per diem for the OSC and personnel required to 
                        deploy and maintain federally-owned equipment; 
  
                   (c)  Replacement costs for expendable materials provided and 
                        utilized, including fuel for vessels, aircraft, or vehicles 
                        used at the OSC's request in support of response activities; 
  
                   (d)  Supplies, materials, and minor equipment procured 
                        specifically for recovery activities; 
  
                   (e)  Incremental operating and contract costs incurred in 
                        providing assistance to the OSC; 
  
                   (f)  Rental costs, as approved by the parent agency, for 
                        nonexpendable removal and support equipment including the 
                        refurbishment, repair, and replacement costs; 
  
                   (g)  Salaries of personnel not routinely part of response efforts 
                        but specifically requested by the OSC (including Coast Guard 
                        Reservists called to active duty to assist in supervising 
                        federal removal activities). 
  
                   (h)  Travel and per diem for RRT members to attend meetings 
                        specifically convened to provide OSC support during 
 
  
  
  7.B.7.c.    (1)  Direct expenditures from the fund (i.e., payment of contractors 
                   or vendors); 
  
              (2)  All reimbursable expenses listed in subparagraph 7.B.7.b above; 
  
              (3)  All personnel costs, including response personnel salaries; 
  
              (4)  Equipment costs, including depreciation and maintenance; 
  
              (5)  Administrative overhead (included in standard rates for 
                   subparagraphs 7.B.7.c.(3) and (4) above in COMDTINST 7310 
                   (Series)); and 
  
              (6)  Pollution removal damage claims referred to in subparagraph 
                   7.B.6.c.(3)(a)(viii) above. 
  
          d.  Damage Assessment Studies .  A question is often raised as to whether 
              the Pollution Fund (established under 33 U.S.C. 1321(k) may be used 
              to pay for damage assessment studies in preparation for potential 
              claims which may be filed for oil pollution damage.  It has been 
              determined that the Pollution Fund is not available for damage 
              assessment studies.  However, it is recognized that some form of 
              limited scientific inquiry, which may be supportive of damage 
              assessment efforts, may be required to assist the OSC in the 
              performance of Phase III (Subpart E, NCP) activities.  Efforts to 
              identify particularly environmentally-sensitive areas and to evaluate 
              alternate countermeasures are Phase III activities and, therefore, may 
              be funded from the Pollution Fund.  The funding of scientific actions 
              other than those that are requested by the OSC and that directly 
              support Phase III (Subpart E, NCP) activities, such as scientific 
              investigations or damage assessment studies, shall be provided by the 
              agency having legal responsibility for such activities and are not 
              payable from the Pollution Fund. 
  
          e.  Expenditure Limits .  For each incident, the OSC may commit up to 
              $50,000 from the fund without preauthorization from the district 
              commander; amounts over this limit must be requested from the 
              cognizant district commander.  The district commander may authorize 
              expenditures up to $1 million for each incident (see 33 CFR 
              153.105(a)).  Authorization for expenditures over $1 million must be 
              obtained through Commandant (G-WER). 
  C.  Procedures Unique To Hazardous Substance Releases . 
  
      1.  General.  Response to hazardous substance releases are, in many respects, 
          similar to responses to oil discharges.  There are, however, significant 
          differences.  The nature of the hazards posed by such releases requires a 
          much more cautious approach.  Personnel involved in hazardous substance 
          response must be properly trained and equipped to carry out the necessary 
          response functions. 
 
############
  
  
  7.C.1.  a.  Hazardous Substance Response Functions .  These functions include: 
  
              (1)  Carrying out traditional COTP response measures such as 
                   restricting access to the affected area, controlling marine 
                   traffic, notifying affected facilities, coordinating with state 
                   and local agencies, and assisting as resources and capabilities 
                   permit; 
  
              (2)  Conducting a preliminary assessment of the incident; 
  
              (3)  Identifying potentially responsible parties and informing them of 
                   their potential liability for removal costs, explaining the Coast 
                   Guard's role as OSC, and gathering information for response and 
                   port safety purposes; 
  
              (4)  Carrying out "first aid" mitigation measures if the situation 
                   warrants; 
  
              (5)  Monitoring cleanup actions of responsible parties to ensure that 
                   appropriate action is taken; and 
  
              (6)  If required, initiating appropriate federal removal or remedial 
                   actions. 
  
          b.  Use Of CERCLA Guidance .  This section describes the more important and 
              unique aspects of a hazardous substance response under CERCLA.  Its 
              use requires a working knowledge of the more detailed information 
              found in: 
  
              (1)  Response procedures described in section 7.B above; 
  
              (2)  CERCLA and the relevant provisions of the NCP; 
  
              (3)  COMDTINST M16465.29, CERCLA Response Authority and Associated 
                   Coast Guard Policies; 
  
              (4)  COMDTINST M16465.30, Policy Guidance for Response to Hazardous 
                   Chemical Releases. 
  
              In reading the above extensive policy guidance for carrying out Coast 
              Guard responsibilities under CERCLA, the OSC must not lose sight of 
              the program's foremost objectives to ensure that proper measures are 
              undertaken by the responsible party to mitigate damages from releases; 
              and when appropriate, federal efforts are initiated, then managed and 
              coordinated by the OSC.  As hazardous substance response procedures 
              and policies become refined with field experience, the detailed 
              COMDTINST's will be cancelled, with policies of continuing importance 
              incorporated into this section.  Basic CERCLA response procedures can 
              be contrasted to an FWPCA response by comparing the flowcharts shown 
              in Figures 7-1 and 7-2. 
       7.C.1.  c.  Levels Of Response Capability
. 
  
              (1)  The program goal  is that COTP's predesignated as OSC's shall be 
                   capable of performing the functions described in subparagraph 
                   7.C.1.a above.  Performing these functions may require persons to 
                   enter contaminated environments.  However, the actual level of 
                   response capability to be maintained at a unit must be based on 
                   the risk of chemical releases occurring in the OSC's zone and the 
                   mix of industry, state, local, and other federal response 
                   capability already in place. 
  
              (2)  In those zones where the district commander and OSC determine 
                   there is a significant risk of chemical releases, and the 
                   existing response capability (Coast Guard and others) within 
                   these zones are inadequate, units shall develop Level A or B 
                   entry capability.  When this is not possible because of 
                   insufficiently trained personnel or inadequate protective 
                   equipment, as detailed in COMDTINST M16465.30, the OSC shall seek 
                   the necessary additional resources and adopt a conservative 
                   response posture until these requirements are met.  OSC's with 
                   jurisdiction over zones where the risk of a chemical release is 
                   low shall maintain a conservative response posture. 
  
              (3)  Units maintaining a conservative response posture shall carry out 
                   all of the above OSC functions not requiring entry of unit 
                   personnel to hazardous environments.  In situations requiring 
                   entry to hazardous environments, these units shall rely on 
                   capabilities of the Strike Teams, state and local response teams, 
                   and commercial resources. 
  
############
              (4)  The integration of Coast Guard resources with existing response 
                   organizations is an important consideration.  This means of 
                   achieving the required level of capability is appropriate when 
                   the existing response organization routinely responds to chemical 
                   releases, and they can perform the survey actions (sampling, 
                   environmental monitoring, etc.) essential for assessing the 
                   hazards presented by a release.  Units relying on outside 
                   organizations to provide the required response capability must 
                   periodically reassess the ability of these organizations to 
                   provide an adequate response. 
  
              (5)  It is important to note that, whatever the response capability 
                   maintained at the unit, the OSC can not relinquish that 
                   responsibility, no matter who is carrying out the actual 
                   response, and shall monitor the response as necessary to ensure 
                   its adequacy.  If a response is not adequate, the OSC shall, to 
                   the extent that resources are available, provide advice to 
                   responders or assume control of the response. 
  
      2.  Preliminary Assessment .  The OSC may call upon a broad range of resources 
          (RRT members, Special Forces, state/local agencies, industry personnel, 
          information systems, etc.) to assist in determining the risks associated 
 
  
  
  7.C.2.  (cont'd) with a released hazardous substance.  The OSC often does not 
          need to extensively investigate an incident prior to determining the need 
          for response.  If the release poses an obvious threat to public health or 
          welfare, or the environment, the OSC should take appropriate actions as 
          rapidly as circumstances dictate.  General guidelines for determining 
          whether to conduct an on-scene assessment and for determining the 
          feasibility of removal actions are the same as for oil incidents contained 
          in subparagraph 7.B.2.d above. 
  
          a.  Determining CERCLA Applicability .  CERCLA applies to pollution 
              incidents when the following conditions exist: 
  
              (1)  The material is a hazardous substance  (see CERCLA, Sec. 101(14)), 
                   or a pollutant or contaminant (see Sec. 104(a)(2)) that may  
                   present an imminent and substantial danger to the public health  
                   or welfare ; 
  
              (2)  The material is released  (see Sec. 101(22)), or there is a 
                   substantial threat  of release, into the environment  (see 
                   Sec. 101(8)); and 
  
              (3)  The responsible party is not taking proper removal actions. 
  
              The OSC is authorized and responsible for assessing releases of any 
              size and for initiating response action under CERCLA 104(a)(1), 
              whenever a release requires a federal removal action.  Although the 
              level of response action taken by the unit (active or conservative) 
              will depend on available resources, units predesignated as OSC's shall 
              monitor the response as necessary, no matter who is carrying it out, 
              to ensure its adequacy.  The reportable quantity of a substance has no 
              bearing on the Coast Guard's authority to respond under CERCLA. 
              Response authority exists whatever the quantity released or threatened 
              to be released into the environment. 
  
          b.  Coast Guard, EPA, DOD Jurisdiction .  CERCLA geographic jurisdiction is 
              broader than the FWPCA in that it encompasses all environmental media 
              (air, land, groundwater, and surface waters).  E.O. 12316, as modified 
              by the Instrument of Redelegation, signed between DOT and the EPA, 
              specifies that the Coast Guard OSC shall respond to hazardous 
              substance releases, or threats of releases, occurring in the coastal 
              zone (specified in RCP's), not involving DOD vessels or facilities, 
              that originate from: 
  
############
              (1)  Vessels (including remedial actions); 
  
              (2)  Facilities, other than hazardous waste management facilities, 
                   when the release requires immediate action to prevent risk of 
                   harm to human life, health, or the environment; or 
  
              (3)  Hazardous waste management facilities or other illegal disposal 
                   areas, when the Coast Guard OSC determines emergency containment 
                   or other immediate removal actions are necessary prior to the 
 
  
  
  7.C.2.b.    (3)  (cont'd) arrival of the EPA OSC.  [NOTE:  The EPA has agreed to 
                   respond to these incidents to relieve Coast Guard OSC's within 48 
                   hours of notification.  However, ad hoc agreements concerning the 
                   time for relief may be made between EPA and Coast Guard OSC's.  A 
                   "hazardous waste management facility" includes land, structures, 
                   appurtenances, and improvements on the land used for treating, 
                   storing, or disposing of hazardous waste, whether lawfully or 
                   unlawfully.] 
  
              Therefore, the Coast Guard OSC's preliminary assessment should include 
              a determination of which agency should ultimately provide the OSC.  If 
              the assessment indicates that no cleanup is required or is not 
              feasible, the response may be secured.  If it indicates that action is 
              necessary, the OSC must then determine whether an immediate removal is 
              required.  If the results of the assessment indicate that federal 
              action may be necessary, but the release does not require any of the 
              actions described above, the appropriate EPA regional office should be 
              advised by the most expeditious means.  This request should be 
              confirmed with a message documenting the need for an EPA OSC.  In all 
              cases, the Coast Guard OSC shall log the report and include the 
              incident in the QAR and MSIS-MP.  The DOD acts as OSC for releases of 
              hazardous substances from their vessels and facilities.  When a 
              release from a DOD vessel or facility in the coastal zone affects 
              areas away from the immediate vicinity of the source, the Coast Guard 
              OSC should provide assistance to the DOD OSC as requested.  Note that 
              the Instrument of Redelegation uses the term "immediate removal."  The 
              1985 revisions to the NCP (40 CFR 300.65) deleted the previous 
              differentiation between immediate removals and planned removals, 
              replacing them with one category of removal action.  This should not 
              affect Coast Guard response activities, however, since planned 
              removals were rarely performed.  OSC's should continue to use the 
              definition of "immediate removal" in the Instrument of Redelegation 
              when evaluating the need for Coast Guard response actions.  Releases 
              not meeting these criteria should be referred to EPA for any necessary 
 
  
  
  7.C.2.  c.  (cont'd) required, a more extensive removal or remedial action may 
              still be warranted.  This may occur in situations where the release 
              poses no immediate threat, but action is necessary to reduce or 
              eliminate the potential for harm in the future.  In such cases that do 
              not involve vessels, the OSC shall refer the release to the 
              appropriate EPA regional office.  Prior to referring a release, 
              however, the OSC should be aware that the administrative procedures 
              for remedial action will require that the referred release compete for 
              funding against a multitude of uncontrolled waste sites across the 
              country.  As a consequence, it is unlikely that EPA will respond to a 
              release that affects only a limited area.  The OSC must be prepared to 
              conduct immediate removal actions if the situation deteriorates before 
              remedial action can be accomplished.  OSC's should recognize this 
              circumstance when they refer releases to EPA for action. 
  
############
      3.  Actions Required When The Polluter Is Identified .  As is the case with oil 
          spills, the OSC shall make every effort to have the responsible party 
          initiate removal actions, including issuing a Notice of Federal Interest 
          (see subparagraph 7.B.3.a and Figure 7-3 above) and, when appropriate, 
          issue an Administrative Order.  Normally, the responsible party will take 
          proper actions and the OSC need only monitor operations as described in 
          subparagraph 7.B.3.b above.  CERCLA differs from the FWPCA in that, under 
          certain conditions, it enables the OSC to order the polluter to undertake 
          the corrective measures specified in an Administrative Order (see CERCLA 
          106(a)).  Administrative Orders are most appropriately issued prior to 
          initiating a federal response.  Their use is limited to releases, or 
          threats of releases that: 
  
          a.  Involve a hazardous substance; 
  
          b.  Originate from a facility ; and 
  
          c.  May pose an imminent and substantial endangerment to the public health 
              or welfare or the environment. 
  
          Administrative Orders may not be used when the source of the release is a 
          vessel, or the release involves a pollutant or contaminant.  For further 
          guidance as to Administrative Order policy and scope, see Chapter 5 of 
          COMDTINST M16465.29.  The OSC shall notify the affected state, or state 
          representative on the RRT, of the intent to issue an Administrative 
          Order.  Figure 7-11 outlines a sample Administrative Order. 
  
      4.  Initiating Federal Removal Operations . 
  
          a.  The OSC will use CERCLA funds to pay for removal costs when the 
              responsible party does not conduct proper removal actions, or is 
              unknown, and immediate removal is necessary.  A Notice of Federal 
              Assumption of Response Activities should be issued if the polluter is 
              known.  As discussed in paragraph 7.A.3 above, for those incidents 
              involving foreign vessels, the Notice of Federal Assumption should 
              also cite FWPCA 311(c) if both statutes apply (i.e., discharge of 
              hazardous substance listed in 40 CFR 117 in a reportable quantity into 
 
  
  
                                 FIGURE 7-11 
  
                        SAMPLE ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER 
  
  Administrative Order issued to:  (name of person to whom order is directed). 
  
  ["This is to confirm the oral order which (OSC representative) of my staff issued 
  to you on (date)."] 
  
  Pursuant to Subsection (a) to Section 106 to the Comprehensive Environmental 
  Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), Public Law 96-510, 
  Subsection (a) of Section 3 of Executive Order 12316, 49 CFR 1.46(gg), and 33 CFR 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-11 (cont'd) 
  
  If you willfully fail or refuse to comply with this order, you will be subject to 
  the following sanction(s).  A fine of not more than $5,000 for each day during 
  which such failure continues may be imposed under Subsection (b) of Section 106 of 
  CERCLA.  [Further, should you be found liable under Section 107 of CERCLA for 
  costs incurred by the United States in responding to this incident, you may also 
  be found liable for punitive damages for your failure without sufficient cause to 
  provide the response action ordered above.  The amount of these punitive damages 
  will be at least equal to, but no more than three times, the amount of those 
  incurred costs.  See paragraph (3) of Subsection (c) of Section 107 of CERCLA.] 
  
############
  In addition to possible penalties for noncompliance with this order, you may be 
  liable under Subsection (a) of Section 107 of CERCLA for the actual costs incurred 
  by the United States in responding to the ["release" or "release threat"] referred 
  to above.  [As (OSC representative) informed you, the Coast Guard has initiated a 
  federal cleanup because your actions to date have been determined to be 
  unsatisfactory.]  Compliance with this order does not alter your liability for 
  government response costs incurred prior to that compliance. 
  
  Please address all inquiries concerning this matter to (name, address, phone 
  number). 
  
                                      Sincerely, 
  
  
                                      (OSC Signature)  
  
  Encl:  (1) Action Ordered By OSC 
  
  Issued at (unit, address) 
  on (time, date) 
  
  Delivered to (individual, title) 
      at:  (place) 
      on:  (time, date) 
      by:  (person delivering) 
  
  [NOTE:  Brackets denote portions of the administrative order which vary with the 
  circumstances of the incident and of the issuance of the administrative order. 
  The OSC tailors these portions of the order to suit the existing situation.] 
 
  
  
  7.C.4.  a.  (cont'd)  navigable waters, the contiguous zone, or other offshore 
              waters under FWPCA jurisdiction).  In a similar manner, the same types 
              of resources for federal operations described in subparagraph 7.B.4.a 
              above should be used.  The OSC shall supervise the operation as 
              generally described in subparagraph 7.B.4.c above. 
  
          b.  Although there are some situations where the 311(k) Pollution Fund 
              could also be used to fund removal costs (i.e., discharge of substance 
              listed in 40 CFR 117 into navigable waters, the contiguous zone, or 
              other offshore waters under FWPCA jurisdiction), the Coast Guard and 
              EPA have agreed that, whenever possible, CERCLA will be used for a 
              hazardous substance response.  In any case, the 311(k) fund shall not 
              be used for response to hazardous substance incidents without prior 
              Commandant (G-WER) approval. 
  
          c.  Upon determining that a federal removal is necessary, the OSC must 
              notify EPA Headquarters of the estimated costs, and obtain a CERCLA 
              account number and document control numbers.  For incidents that occur 
              after working hours and/or on weekends, the OSC should initiate 
              necessary actions and contact EPA the next working day.  When 
              notifying EPA, the OSC must provide information on the location and 
              nature of the incident, and the nature of response activities to be 
              performed.  Note that the OSC must obtain a new document control 
              number for each contract initiated for a response and each subsequent 
              modification (i.e., if five contractors are involved in a response, 
              five document control numbers must be initially obtained from EPA). 
              If the obligated amount for a contract is increased at a later date, 
              another document control number must be obtained to account for the 
              increase. 
  
          d.  CERCLA encourages state and local response actions and can be used to 
              provide reimbursement for certain actions described in Section 111 of 
              the law when certified by the OSC.  The EPA (the administrator of the 
              fund) establishes policies that govern what specific costs are 
              reimbursable.  Any state that desires to enter into a contract or 
              cooperative agreement to carry out response actions under CERCLA 
              should be referred to the EPA. 
  
############
      5.  Determining Removal Completeness . 
  
          a.  As a general rule the OSC should pursue removal operations until: 
  
              (1)  All environmental and public health and welfare concerns are 
                   addressed, and the criteria for initiating a removal action no 
                   longer exist; or 
  
              (2)  Substantial cleanup techniques must be employed, after the 
                   immediate and significant risk of harm to human health or the 
                   environment has been abated, to complete the removal of remaining 
                   contamination. 
 
  
  
  7.C.5.  b.  In those incidents where the need exists to perform substantial 
              cleanup techniques that require a commitment of resources exceeding 
              the OSC's capability, the OSC shall continue operations to stabilize 
              the situation until arrangements can be made for EPA relief. 
  
          c.  When long-term cleanup techniques are not indicated, the OSC's 
              operation should remove harmful concentrations of the pollutant from 
              the environment and properly dispose of them to prevent the need for 
              subsequent removal efforts. 
  
          d.  CERCLA 104(c)(1) prohibits response actions in excess of 6-months 
              duration or exceeding $1 million in response costs ( not including 
              costs associated with investigation, monitoring, or damage assessment) 
              unless the following conditions are met: 
  
              (1)  Continued response actions are immediately required to prevent, 
                   limit, or mitigate an emergency; 
  
              (2)  An immediate risk to public health, welfare, or the environment 
                   exists; and 
  
              (3)  Such assistance will not otherwise be provided on a timely basis. 
  
              Costs to be included in determining whether the $1 million limit has 
              been reached include all contractor costs, other federal agency 
              expenses, and all Coast Guard out-of-pocket expenses.  Requests to 
              exceed the 6-month time limit shall be made to Commandant (G-WER) via 
              the district.  Requests to exceed $1 million must be made to EPA 
              Headquarters (Emergency Response Division). 
  
      6.  Entry Into Contaminated Areas . 
  
          a.  Response Types .  Once the hazards associated with a release are 
              identified, the appropriate level of unit response must be identified, 
              either a conservative response or an active response. 
  
              (1)  A conservative response  includes all coordination, information 
                   collection, and control functions carried out by the OSC that do 
                   not require entry of unit personnel into a hazardous environment. 
  
              (2)  An active response  is one where Coast Guard personnel must enter 
                   an area requiring the use of personal protective equipment.  Unit 
                   personnel would normally be involved in an active response with 
 
  
  
  7.C.6.a.(2)      (d)  Monitoring or supervision of contractor cleanup activities. 
  
              Generally, an initial conservative response, consisting of 
              recommending evacuation to the appropriate authorities and maintaining 
              a safe perimeter, will be undertaken whenever the identity of the 
              released substance(s) is unknown or uncertain.  Entry by unit 
              personnel shall not occur unless the pollutant has been identified, 
              associated hazards determined, and the required level of protective 
              equipment established.  Active entry shall not occur unless the 
              minimum number of trained personnel and adequate protective equipment 
              is available.  Entries will only be carried out by a team trained in  
              chemical response .  As a consequence, there will be occasions when a 
              unit will be unable to mount a complete response to a serious 
              incident.  This circumstance is preferred to attempting a complex and 
              potentially hazardous job without the necessary staffing, training, 
              and equipment.  The above policies notwithstanding, there are 
              occasions that necessitate certain calculated risks be taken to 
              protect the public health and welfare.  In such cases, risks to  
              personnel should be reduced to the minimum level possible consistent  
              with the operational situation and shall not be incurred for purely  
              environmental purposes . 
  
############
          b.  Development Of A Response Plan .  OSC's shall formulate an 
 
  
  
  7.C.6.  c.  Entry Procedures . 
  
              (1)  Personal Safety Practices .  The following personal safety 
                   practices must be followed by all personnel involved in entries 
                   to the hazardous environment: 
  
                   (a)  Eating, drinking, chewing gum or tobacco, smoking, etc., are 
                        prohibited in the contaminated area.  Personnel drinking 
                        liquids to replenish body fluids must be thoroughly 
                        decontaminated before such actions are authorized. 
  
                   (b)  Facial hair that interferes with the mask-to-face seal is 
                        not allowed on any personnel required to wear respiratory 
                        protection equipment. 
  
                   (c)  Prescription drugs should not be taken by entry personnel 
                        unless specifically approved by a qualified physician. 
                        Consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be forbidden. 
  
                   (d)  All entry personnel must be thoroughly familiar with the 
                        standard safety procedures and response plan.                 (2)  Safety Procedures
.  The following safety procedures will apply 
                   for all entries to hazardous environments: 
  
                   (a)  Within the contaminated area, the entry team shall work 
                        using the "buddy" system.  In addition, a two-person rescue 
                        team shall be standing by when Level A or B entries are 
                        being carried out. 
  
                   (b)  Contact with contaminated surfaces (e.g., puddles, vapor 
                        clouds, etc.) should be avoided during an entry. 
  
                   (c)  Only essential personnel and equipment should be in the 
                        contaminated area.  Entries shall occur only after the 
                        objective of the entry has been determined. 
  
                   (d)  All personnel and equipment leaving the contaminated area 
                        must be decontaminated to ensure that contaminants are not 
                        spread outside the contaminated area.  Personnel 
                        decontamination should include a thorough washing of the 
                        entire body as soon as practicable after protective clothing 
                        has been removed. 
  
                   (e)  Entry team members shall be thoroughly briefed prior to each 
                        entry.  They should also be debriefed after exiting the 
                        contaminated area. 
  
                   (f)  To maintain accountability for all persons within the 
                        response area, persons entering or leaving the response 
                        scene should be required to log in and out. 
 
  
  
  7.C.6.c.    (2)  (cont'd) COMDTINST M16465.30 provides a more detailed 
                   description of procedures to be followed during entry operations. 
  
      7.  Documenting The Response .  The documentation requirements listed in 
          paragraph 7.B.6 above also apply to CERCLA responses with the exceptions 
          noted below. 
  
          a.  POLREPS.  Include EPA Headquarters (Emergency Response Division, TWX 
 
  
  
  7.C.8.a.    (4)  Use of Administrative Orders is inappropriate or unsuccessful in 
                   compelling the polluter to undertake necessary removal actions. 
  
          b.  Funding Vendor Costs .  Figure 7-12 provides procedures for funding 
              vendor costs incurred during emergency response to releases or threats 
              of releases.  Vendor costs include: 
  
              (1)  Contractor costs; 
  
              (2)  Rental of equipment for the response; 
  
              (3)  Supplies and materials; and 
  
              (4)  Equipment (including transportation costs) purchased for the 
                   specific incident that will be expended during a response. 
  
          c.  Funding Non-Vendor Costs .  Non-vendor costs for CERCLA-funded removals 
              (incident specific) are reimbursed from the fund under separate 
              IAA's.  Examples of non-vendor costs include: 
  
              (1)  Use of Coast Guard aircraft and vessels; 
  
              (2)  Salaries for Coast Guard personnel; 
  
              (3)  Travel and per diem for military and civilian personnel; 
  
              (4)  Salary and overtime costs for civilian personnel; 
  
              (5)  Fuel; and 
  
############
              (6)  Replacement or repair costs for nonexpendable equipment. 
  
          d.  Additional Funding Capabilities .  In addition to the costs that are 
              reimbursable under the FWPCA, CERCLA also funds agency costs incurred 
              during a preliminary assessment or while monitoring removal operations 
              conducted by the responsible party.  EPA, as fund administrator, 
              determines which costs incurred by agencies during the response will 
              be reimbursed from the CERCLA Fund.  Detailed procedures for 
              reimbursement of agency expenses are under development at 
              Headquarters.  In the interim, districts have been provided CERCLA 
              funds to reimburse units for out-of-pocket costs incurred for 
 
 
 
FIGURE 7-12 
 
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING 
Between 
THE UNITED STATES COAST GUARD 
and 
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 
. . . 
A Mechanism for Funding Vendor Costs Incurred by the 
U.S. Coast Guard During Emergency Response to Releases 
or Threats of Releases of Hazardous Substances 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
The U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) agree that 
a mechanism is required to fund USCG costs incurred during emergency response to 
releases, or the threats of releases of hazardous substances or pollutants or 
contaminants.  This Memorandum of Understanding establishes the accounting, 
contracting, and fund management control policies and procedures for USCG response 
actions. 
 
AUTHORITY : 
 
The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 
(CERCLA) (94 Stat. 2796; 42 USC 9615) authorizes the President to respond to releases 
or threats of releases into the environment of hazardous substances, or pollutants or 
contaminants which may present an imminent and substantial danger to the public health 
or welfare.  The Executive Order 12316 delegates certain authority and responsibility 
for 
response to the Administrator of the EPA and to the Secretary of Transportation.  The 
USCG and the EPA are entering into this agreement in order to carry out their joint 
responsibilities under CERCLA and the Executive Order. 
 
SCOPE: 
 
The USCG and the EPA agree that vendor costs are costs incurred by the USCG in 
response to a specific incident of a release, or threat of a release, of hazardous 
substances. 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-12 (cont'd) 
  
The vendor costs are only those costs which qualify as allowable uses of the Hazardous 
Substance Response Trust Fund when the USCG undertakes response activities pursuant 
to CERCLA, Executive Order 12316, and the National Oil and Hazardous Substances 
Contingency Plan.  Examples of vendor costs include, but are not limited, to, the 
following: 
  
  contractor and consulting costs; 
  lease or rental of equipment; and 
  supplies, materials, and equipment (including transportation costs) procured for 
the specific response activity and expended during a response. 
  
Vendor costs do not include USCG out-of-pocket expenses which are: 
 travel and per diem for military and civilian personnel, and overtime costs for 
civilian personnel; 
 fuel for vessels, aircraft, or vehicles used in support of a response activity; and 
 replacement or repair costs for non-expendable equipment. 
 
Funding for out-of-pocket expenses and other non-vendor costs will be the subject of a 
separate agreement between the EPA and the USCG. 
 
The Coast Guard will advise all of its District Commanders, predesignated On-Scene 
Coordinators (OSC), and Regional Response Team members of the terms of this 
Memorandum.  The USCG will provide to EPA a current listing of District personnel who 
will serve as appropriate contacts for EPA on matters relating to contracting and 
accounting for response activity. 
 
############
CONTRACTING AND ACCOUNTING : 
 
The USCG and the EPA agree that the EPA will perform all accounting for vendor costs. 
 
The USCG and the EPA agree that the contracting system used by the USCG for responses to oil and hazardous substance discharges under the authority of Section 311 of the Clean Water Act, shall be used for USCG responses to all releases or threats of releases of hazardous substances or pollutants or contaminants as defined in CERCLA. 
 
Any contracts for immediate removal actions in response to releases or threats of 
releases of hazardous substances or pollutants or contaminants entered into by the Coast 
 
 
 
FIGURE 7-12 (cont'd) 
  
Guard, where the USCG OSC is acting in the capacity of first responding Federal 
official, pursuant to the National Contingency Plan, shall remain in effect only during 
the period that the USCG is the OSC. 
 
Any contract for immediate removal actions in response to releases, or threats of 
releases, of hazardous substances or pollutants or contaminants, entered into by the 
Coast Guard pursuant to the authority delegated under Executive Order 12316, and 
retained by the USCG in Section (c) of the Instrument of Redelegation, executed 2 
October 1981 by the Secretary of Transportation and consented to on 9 October 1981 by 
the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall remain in effect only 
during the period that the USCG is acting under this authority. 
 
The USCG and the EPA agree on the following procedures for coordinating the EPA 
accounting system and the USCG contracting system. 
  
    1.  Obtain account number  
  
For each incident where CERCLA funds are obligated, the USCG OSC must obtain a 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-12 (cont'd) 
  
                   o  Appropriation Number :  This number is permanently assigned to the trust 
                      fund. 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-12 (cont'd) 
  
                   by certified mail within 72 hours of award by a USCG District Contracting 
                   Officer to the EPA paying office: 
  
                                     Financial Management Officer 
                                  Accounting Operations Office (MD-32) 
                                   Environmental Protection Agency 
                                        Research Triangle Park 
                                         Durham, NC 27711 
  
                   The USCG will assure that the USCG contract number and the EPA accounting 
                   codes (appropriation number, account number, document control number, object 
                   class, and dollar amount) are clearly and legibly presented on the contract 
                   document.  The USCG will assure that the EPA accounting codes and USCG 
                   contract number are made known to the contractor.  The original contract will 
                   be retained by the USCG. 
  
               4.  Process Contractor Invoices  
  
                   4.1  Contractor Responsibilities : 
  
                        The contractor will: 
                        o Send the original invoice to the EPA paying office.  The address for 
                          the paying office is: 
  
                                   Financial Management Officer 
                                Accounting Operations Office (MD-32) 
                                  Environmental Protection Agency 
                                       Research Triangle Park 
                                        Durham, NC 27711 
  
                        o Submit a duplicate copy of the invoice to the USCG OSC. 
                        o Assure that the USCG contract number and the EPA accounting codes 
                          (appropriation number, account number, document control number, 
                          object class, and dollar amount) are clearly and legibly presented on 
                          the invoice and its copy.  Contractors submitting invoices for work 
                          performed under a contract are to number each invoice sequentially 
                          beginning with one (1) and make a notation on the last invoice under 
                          the contract with the phrase "FINAL INVOICE." 
  
############
                   4.2  USCG OSC Responsibilities : 
  
                        o The USCG OSC must certify each correct and proper invoice.  A 
                          correct and proper invoice is one in which the services performed are 
                          acceptable and are consistent with the services billed and the 
                          accounting data properly transcribed. 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-12 (cont'd) 
  
                        The certification statement to be used by OSC's of both agencies for 
                        all CERCLA cases. 
  
                        "I,_____________________, certify to the best of my 
                                        (OSC NAME) 
                        knowledge and belief that the services have been performed and are 
                        accepted, and that applicable Pollution Incident Reporting System 
                        (PIRS) and EPA Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure (SPCC) 
                        information has been correctly and completely submitted." * 
  
                                             _______________________________ 
                                                       (OSC's Signature) 
  
                                             _______________________________ 
                                                          (date) 
  
                        o The OSC will forward by certified mail the accepted and certified 
                          invoice, within 72 hours of receipt of the invoice from the contractor, 
                          to the EPA paying office (address shown above). 
  
                        o The USCG OSC shall not certify invoices which include discrepancies 
                          between services performed and services billed.  In the event that 
                          there are discrepancies in the invoices, the USCG representative 
                          shall, immediately upon receipt of the invoice, take appropriate 
                          action to notify the contractor and to resolve the discrepancies. 
  
                          Within 72 hours of receipt of an invoice containing unresolved 
                          discrepancies, the OSC shall forward the invoice by certified mail to 
                          the EPA paying office (address shown above).  The invoice will be 
                          endorsed with the following statement: 
  
                          "This invoice contains unresolved discrepancies.  DO NOT PAY THIS 
                          INVOICE UNTIL YOU RECEIVE WRITTEN NOTIFICATION THAT 
                          THE DISCREPANCIES HAVE BEEN RESOLVED AND THE INVOICE 
                          IS REISSUED." 
  
                                        ____________________________ 
                                                (OSC signature) 
  
                                        ____________________________ 
                                                    (date) 
  
  *NOTE:  PIRS data, including Chemical Spill Information, shall be submitted 
          in accordance with COMDTINST M16450.25.  Revised data submission 
          requirements for EPA will be promulgated when available. 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-12 (cont'd) 
  
  
                   4.3  EPA Responsibilities : 
                         The EPA has the responsibility to process contract invoices and to 
                          make contract payments in a timely manner.  Contract payments are 
                          normally made within 30 days after invoice receipt. 
                          Payment will be contingent on the EPA paying office receipt of the 
                          original invoice from the contractor and the USCG OSC's certified 
                          copy of the invoice. 
                         The paying office will withhold payment for contractor services if the 
                          OSC has not certified the invoice.  Payments will be made when the 
                          discrepancies are resolved and the invoice is reissued and received at 
                          the paying office. 
                          The paying office will not pay any response costs in excess of the 
                          dollar amount of the contract.  In the event that a contractor's 
                          service exceeds the dollar amount of the contract, the EPA paying 
                          office will inform the USCG District Representative who will take 
                          appropriate action. 
  
  
               FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT : 
  
               The USCG and EPA agree that the USCG may obligate up to $250,000 per release without 
               prior approval from EPA.  Approval to obligate amounts in excess of the $250,000  
               ceiling must be obtained from 
: 
  
                                        Chief, Response Operations Branch 
                                          Emergency Response Division 
                                    Office of Emergency and Remedial Response 
                                         Environmental Protection Agency 
                                               401 M Street, S. W. 
                                              Washington, DC 30460 
                                                 (202) 382-7917 
  
               The USCG will modify, as necessary, any existing contracts to reflect each ceiling 
               increase.  Certified copies of the contract modification must be submitted to the EPA 
               paying offices. 
  
############
               The USCG and EPA recognize that CERCLA requires that response actions cease when 
               $1 million is obligated or 6 months have elapsed from the date of initial response, 
except 
               as authorized under Section 104(eX1), thereof. 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-12 (cont'd) 
  
  
               REPORTING REQUIREMENTS :  POLREPS  
  
               The USCG and the EPA agree that the EPA, acting in the capacity as manager of the 
               Hazardous Substance Response Trust Fund, requires up-to-date information on CERCLA 
               response actions and the related obligations of CERCLA funds for these actions. 
               Pollution Reports (POLREPS) are submitted by USCG OSC's to USCG District 
               Commanders.  POLREPS provide factual operational data relating to arelease and a 
               current accounting of project costs.  The USCG OSC will submit a duplicate copy of all 
               POLREP's to the Director, Emergency Response Division, EPA, (TWX # 710-8229269) for 
               the purpose of communicating CERCLA response and fund obligation data to EPA.  The 
               initial POLREP will be sent within 24 hours of initiating a response action, if  
               information is available.  Once the initial report is completed, program POLREPS should  
               be sent on a routine basis. 
  
  
               PERIOD OF AGREEMENT : 
  
               This Memorandum shall continue in effect until modified or amended by the amount of 
               both parties or terminated by either party upon a thirty (30) days advance written notice 
               to the other party. 
  
               Nothing in this agreement is intended to diminish or otherwise affect the statutory 
               authority of the agencies involved. 
  
               This Memorandum will become effective at noon on the date of the last signature below. 
  
  
  
  
  
                                           W. E. CALDWELL 
                                           Rear Admiral U.S. Coast Guard 
                                           Chief, Office of Marine 
                                             Environment and Systems 
  
  
  
                                           CHRISTOPHER J. CAPPER 
                                           Acting Assistant Administrator 
                                           Office of Solid Waste and 
                                             Emergency Response 
 
  
  
  7.D.  Procedures For Specific Response Activities . 
  
      1.  Entry Onto Private Property . 
  
          a.  Emergency Conditions .  The OSC generally has the authority to enter 
              private property without a warrant for the purpose of carrying out 
              response activities and related investigations.  The owner's 
              permission shall be sought prior to entry.  However, on occasion, 
              entry without permission may be necessary when the owner is not 
              available or the situation is urgent.  Entry without permission should 
              be followed up by continuing attempts to locate and advise the owner 
              of the situation.  It is recommended that the condition of the 
              property prior to entry be documented (e.g., by photograph) and that 
              local authorities be present when entry is required without the 
              owner's permission.  In any case, common sense should be exercised 
              while on the property.  Should an owner refuse entry, the OSC should 
              seek assistance from the district legal officer in obtaining court 
              orders from federal or local enforcement authorities.  Using force to 
              gain entry is permissible if the urgency of the situation warrants 
              such action; however, all reasonable alternatives should be exhausted 
              first.  Force should not be used to the extent that it would amount to 
              a breach of the peace or cause personal injury. 
  
          b.  Nonemergency Conditions .  Once response activities have been 
              completed, it may become necessary to initiate an investigation to 
              determine culpability, or to obtain information for the purpose of 
              proving liability.  The procedures for entering private property under 
              these circumstances differ from the procedures enumerated above 
              because an emergency situation no longer exists.  Entry onto private 
              property under these circumstances may violate the constitutional 
              guarantee against unreasonable searches and seizures.  Private 
              property may be entered with the owner's consent, but should not be 
              entered in the absence or without the owner's permission until the 
              district commander (dl) has been contacted for advice and assistance. 
  
############
      2.  Controlling Access .  The OSC must be familiar with other authorities, in 
          addition to the FWPCA and CERCLA, that enable the OSC to prevent a 
          pollution incident or minimize the resulting damage.  Chapter 1 of this 
          volume details guidelines for denying entry or detaining vessels in port 
          that have discharged pollutants or have a history of pollution incidents. 
          Chapter 1 of this volume also prescribes policies for limiting access to 
          spill areas during pollution cleanup operations and/or establishing safety 
          zones. 
  
      3.  Use Of Dispersants Or Other Chemical Additives .  Dispersants or chemical 
          agents may be more effective than mechanical or physical methods for 
          mitigating pollution damage.  The NCP, Subpart H prescribes the criteria 
          for using dispersants and other chemicals.  COMDTNOTE 16465 (series) 
          periodically distributes the latest list of EPA accepted chemical agents 
          and additives, along with product bulletins describing technical data, 
          application criteria, effectiveness, and toxicity. 
 
  
  
  7.D.4.  Use Of Special Forces Or Teams .  The OSC may obtain support from numerous 
          private, commercial, and governmental organizations.  However, four groups 
          were created solely to support the national response mechanism by 
          augmenting the OSC's staff and providing specialized pollution response 
          expertise.  They are the NSF, the ERT, the SSC's, and the PIAT.  In 
          addition, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) has 
          assigned Public Health Advisors to most EPA regional offices. 
  
          a.  National Strike Force (NSF) .  OSC's are encouraged to use the NSF 
              whenever its expertise or equipment is needed, or to augment the OSC's 
              staff when it is overburdened by a response to a given incident.  The 
              strike teams that comprise the NSF can provide communications support; 
              oil and hazardous substance removal expertise; ship's damage control; 
              and support to monitor removal operations, document costs, and 
              coordinate logistics.  The NSF should be used when: 
  
              (1)  A medium or major discharge has occurred; 
  
              (2)  Control of the discharge requires the special knowledge or 
                   special equipment of the NSF; 
  
              (3)  Response will require in excess of 2 days to complete removal 
                   operations, and augmentation by NSF personnel will release local 
                   forces to return to normal operations; or 
  
              (4)  In the judgment of the OSC, NSF capabilities are necessary. 
  
              The NSF is also available to assist state and local governments, 
              provided that such assistance does not interfere with supporting 
              federal OSC's or other federal agencies.  Additionally, the NSF Dive 
              Team, a subunit of the Atlantic Strike Team, can assist the OSC by: 
              conducting underwater investigations and evaluations; serving as an 
              advisor to the OSC when commercial or U.S. Navy divers and salvors are 
              used; and performing light salvage or diving operations to control a 
              pollution source when other divers are not immediately available.  NSF 
              assistance may be requested by calling a strike team directly, 
              contacting the team via the NRC, or contacting the team via the area 
              or district commander.  [NOTE:  Section 7.F below describes the 
              administrative requirements for the NSF, including mission performance 
              standards, organization, and training standards.  NSF Dive Team 
              capabilities supporting other mission areas are described in paragraph 
              7.F.6 below.] 
  
############
          b.  Environmental Response Team (ERT) .  The EPA's ERT can provide 
              technical advice and equipment pertaining to the environmental effects 
              of discharges or releases.  Among the disciplines of the team are 
              sanitary engineering, environmental engineering, chemical engineering, 
              chemistry, biology, environmental health, risk assessment, and 
              analytical support.  Areas of expertise include: 
  
              (1)  Determining safety precautions for hazardous chemical removal; 
 
  
  
  7.D.4.b.    (2)  Evaluating the nature and extent of contamination; 
  
              (3)  Identifying hazards of pollutants not found in standard 
                   information sources (e.g., Chemical Hazardous Response 
                   Information System (CHRIS)); 
  
              (4)  Assessing degree of mitigation/removal required; 
  
              (5)  Identifying critical and sensitive areas that require 
                   extraordinary protective efforts; and 
  
              (6)  Selecting disposal method and appropriate disposal facilities. 
  
              In addition, the ERT is responsible for activating the Environmental 
              Emergency Response Unit (EERU), a unit which can provide on-scene 
              equipment capable of removing pollutants from contaminated water, 
              conducting treatment studies, and performing a wide range of 
              analytical capabilities.  ERT assistance can be requested from the EPA 
              representative on the RRT.  Promptly follow up the request with a 
              message to the Hazardous Response Support Division, EPA Headquarters, 
              with the appropriate EPA regional office as an information addressee. 
  
          c.  Scientific Support Coordinators (SSC's) .  SSC's can augment the OSC's 
              staff by providing scientific advice and arranging for scientific 
              support on-scene.  Generally, SSC's are provided by the National 
              Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (.)(NOAA) in coastal areas, and by 
              the EPA in the inland regions.  During a response, the SSC serves 
              under the direction of the OSC with the responsibility to provide 
              scientific support for operational decisions and to coordinate 
 
  
  
  7.D.4.c.(1)      (b)  Spill trajectory modeling; 
  
                   (c)  Assessment and advice on the nature, behavior, and fate of 
                        oil and hazardous materials under various environmental 
                        conditions, and recommendations on how best to deal with 
                        them; 
  
                   (d)  Identifying areas of special biological importance; 
  
                   (e)  Assistance in public relations efforts on scientific issues; 
                        and 
  
                   (f)  Advice on safety precautions for response personnel. 
  
              (2)  Contingency Planning Assistance .  Prior to a spill, considerable 
                   information can be provided by the SSC in developing regional and 
                   local contingency plans.  This can include the probability that 
                   spills originating from a given location will effect specific 
                   areas; the location of environmentally sensitive areas; 
                   background data on the behavior of various pollutants known to be 
                   transported in a given area; and the possible environmental 
                   impact of various cleanup strategies. 
  
          d.  Public Information Assist Team (PIAT) .  The PIAT is a team of public 
              affairs specialists knowledgeable in many facets of pollution response 
              (e.g., equipment, clean-up methods, the role of various agencies, and 
              the laws).  They can augment the OSC's staff when public interest is 
              high.  Duties and capabilities of the PIAT are described in volume I 
              of this manual.  Request PIAT assistance by contacting the team via 
              Commandant (G-WER-2), or via the NRC during nonworking hours. 
  
          e.  Agency For Toxic Substances And Disease Registry (ATSDR) Public Health  
              Advisors .  While not specifically listed in the NCP as a special force 
              or team, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), through 
              the ATSDR (previously part of the CDC), has assigned Public Health 
              Advisors to cover each EPA Region.  In most cases, these individuals 
              work at the EPA regional offices.  The ATSDR Public Health Advisors 
              have a wide range of expertise in health-related problems, and are 
              available to assist Coast Guard OSC's during response actions.  They 
              can assist in assessing public health threats posed by an incident, 
              provide advice on the adequacy of personnel protection measures within 
              the response area, investigate health complaints, provide advice on 
              the need to relocate nearby residents, and coordinate the appropriate 
              health response with public health agencies and the private medical 
              community.  They are also available to assist in the development of 
              occupational safety and health considerations for local contingency 
              plans, providing information on the location and availability of 
              laboratory services, expert consultants, hospitals, and other 
              treatment facilities.  The above assistance is available from the 
              regional Public Health Advisors or directly from the ATSDR Emergency 
              Response Coordination Branch in Atlanta, GA, at (404) 452-4100/FTS 
 
############
  
  
  7.D.5.  Procedures For Handling Pollution Incidents Resulting From Outer  
          Continental Shelf (OCS) Activities .  Response procedures for pollution 
          incidents resulting from OCS activities generally parallel those under the 
          FWPCA.  A basic difference is that the Offshore Oil Pollution Compensation 
          Fund established by the OCSLA Amendments (43 U.S.C. 1801-1824) also funds 
 
  
  
                                 FIGURE 7-13 
  
                   NOTICE OF DESIGNATION MESSAGE FORMAT 
  
  
  (Precedence/DTG) 
  FM 
  TO      (Owner/Operator/Guarantor)  (Address) 
          (City/State/Zip Code) 
  INFO    (CG District) 
          (COMDT G-W)) 
  
  ACCT CG-W2GZZZ 
  UNCLAS//NXXXXX// 
  SUBJ: 
  1.  THE ( name of vessel/facility ) OF WHICH YOU ARE THE (owner) (operator) 
  (guarantor) IS DESIGNATED AS THE SOURCE OF OIL POLLUTION UNDER P.L. 95-372 AND 33 
  CFR 135.309.  THE ( name of vessel/facility ), LOCATED AT ( location ), DISCHARGED 
  (quantity ) OF (type of oil ) AT (time/date ). 
  
  2.  UNDER P.L. 95-372 AND TITLE 33 CFR 135.311, YOU HAVE 5 DAYS TO SUBMIT IN 
  WRITING YOUR ACCEPTANCE OR DENIAL OF THIS NOTICE OF DESIGNATION.  FAILURE TO DENY 
  THIS DESIGNATION DOES NOT, IN AND OF ITSELF, CONSTITUTE ACCEPTANCE OF LIABILITY 
  UNDER P.L. 95-372 FOR LOSSES RESULTING FROM THIS INCIDENT.  THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
  SUBMISSION OF A DENIAL OF THIS NOTICE OF DESIGNATION ARE CONTAINED IN TITLE 33 CFR 
  135.311. 
  
  3.  [See * below] NOTE THAT TITLE 33 CFR 135.315-.319 REQUIRES YOU TO INFORM THE 
  PUBLIC OF PROCEDURES FOR INITIATING CLAIMS TO RECOVER ECONOMIC LOSSES FROM THIS 
  DESIGNATED SOURCE OF POLLUTION OR AGAINST THE FUND.  THE INITIAL GEOGRAPHIC AREA 
  THAT IS OR IS LIKELY TO BE AFFECTED IS FROM ( description of area ).  THE INITIAL 
  ADVERTISEMENT OF THIS INCIDENT SHOULD INCLUDE, BUT IS NOT LIMITED TO, PUBLICATION 
  IN THE NOTICE TO MARINERS, PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENTS ON COMMERCIAL RADIO AND 
  TELEVISION STATIONS, AND PAID ADVERTISEMENTS IN LOCAL NEWSPAPERS SERVING THE ABOVE 
  DESIGNATED AREA.  FUTURE SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR ADVERTISEMENTS AND LIMITS OF 
  AFFECTED GEOGRAPHIC AREAS MAY BE FORTHCOMING, AND WILL BE SUBMITTED TO YOU OR YOUR 
  DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE. 
  
  4.  DIRECT FURTHER COMMUNICATION REGARDING THIS INCIDENT, ADVERTISEMENT OF THE 
  INCIDENT, OR DENIAL OF DESIGNATION TO THE CAPTAIN OF THE PORT, ( address, telephone  
  #). 
  
      [NOTE:  *When the Fund Manager, Commandant (G-WFR), determines that the 
      incident need not be advertised, the following may be substituted as paragraph 
      3: 
  
      3.  TITLE 33 CFR 135.309 REQUIRES THAT THIS NOTICE CONTAIN ADVERTISING 
      INSTRUCTIONS WHERE CLAIMS FOR ECONOMIC LOSS OF THE TYPE SPECIFIED IN SECTION 
      303(A) OF P.L. 95-372 MAY RESULT.  BECAUSE POLLUTION RESULTING FROM THIS 
      INCIDENT HAS BEEN MINIMAL AND SUBSTANTIALLY CONTAINED, WE HAVE DETERMINED THAT 
      CLAIMS ARE UNLIKELY AT THIS TIME.  THE COAST GUARD RESERVES THE RIGHT TO 
      REQUIRE ADVERTISEMENT AT A LATER TIME, SHOULD FACTS AND CIRCUMSTANCES CHANGE 
      TO SO WARRANT.] 
 
  
  
  7.D.7.  (cont'd)  TAP Fund administrator.  As is the case with OCS and DWP spills, 
          the FWPCA 311(k) Pollution Fund should be used to initiate federal removal 
          operations and then be reimbursed from the TAP Liability Fund. 
  
      8.  Intervention On The High Seas .  The Intervention on the High Seas Act, as 
          amended (33 U.S.C. 1471-1487), the FWPCA 311(c) and (d), and CERCLA 104(a) 
          authorize Coast Guard intervention when a vessel casualty seaward of the 
          territorial sea poses a grave and imminent danger to U.S. coastlines or 
          related interests, or when a marine disaster in or upon the navigable 
          waters has created a substantial threat of a pollution hazard to the 
          public health or welfare of the United States.  Intervention is 
          "detrimental action without consent" and may include the following: 
  
############
          a.  Orders to the master, owner, or operator of a ship; 
  
          b.  Disposal or destruction of the cargo aboard; 
  
          c.  Removal or destruction of a vessel; 
  
          d.  Deployment of equipment for containing or dealing with a spillage; 
  
          e.  Transfer of oil or hazardous substance to other tanks, or other ships 
              or barges; or 
  
          f.  Salvage operations. 
  
          Coast Guard policy and procedures for intervention actions are contained 
          in COMDTINST 16451.5 (Series). 
  
      9.  Disposal Of Recovered Pollutants . 
  
          a.  Introduction .  Whether monitoring or supervising cleanup operations, 
              the OSC shall ensure proper disposal of recovered pollutants at a 
              disposal or treatment facility permitted to handle the particular 
              pollutant. 
  
          b.  Compliance With Waste Disposal Regulations . 
  
              (1)  Resource Conservation And Recovery Act (RCRA) Applicability .  The 
                   following subparagraphs address the applicability of the RCRA and 
                   its implementing regulations (and, to a limited extent, related 
                   state and local laws) to the storage, treatment, and disposal of 
                   material recovered during response and removal actions.  Local 
                   contingency plans should include the following: 
  
                   (a)  Identification of proper storage, treatment, and disposal 
                        facilities for waste oil and hazardous substances; 
  
                   (b)  Identification of federal and state regulations (including 
                        local ordinances) which apply to the use of those facilities; 
 
  
  
  7.D.9.b.(1)      (c)  Identification of laboratories capable of testing a 
                        recovered substance for hazardous waste characteristics, as 
                        required by 40 CFR 262.11; and 
  
                   (d)  Procedures for obtaining EPA identification numbers from the 
                        EPA regional office. 
  
                   While various state and local laws, regulations, and ordinances 
                   may apply to the storage, treatment, and disposal of wastes 
                   recovered during removal actions where the discharged material 
                   was only petroleum, normally RCRA does not.  However, RCRA does 
                   apply where petroleum wastes meet one or more of the 
                   characteristics set out in 40 CFR 261.20-24 (ignitability, 
                   corrosivity, reactivity, and extraction procedure (EP) 
                   toxicity).  Consequently, wastes meeting those characteristics as 
                   well as any other waste identified in 40 CFR 261 (see enclosure 
                   (3) to COMDTINST M16465.29) which have been recovered in the 
                   course of response or removal actions are subject to RCRA and to 
                   its implementing regulations, except to the extent that waivers 
                   of exemptions may apply (see Notes below). 
  
              (2)  RCRA Concerns For OSC's .  Generally speaking, the RCRA 
                   regulations of most concerns to OSC's deal with the following 
                   matters: 
  
                   (a)  Determinations of whether the recovered material is subject 
                        to RCRA (40 CFR 262.11); 
  
                   (b)  Obtaining an EPA identification number (40 CFR 262.12 and 
                        263.11); 
  
                   (c)  Preparation of a manifest (40 CFR 262.20-.23); 
  
                   (d)  Identifying permitted facilities for disposal of CERCLA 
                        wastes (40 CFR 262.20); 
  
                   (e)  Packaging, labeling, marking, and placarding the waste (40 
                        CFR 262.30-.33); and 
  
                   (f)  Tracking the manifest, and retaining appropriate records (40 
                        CFR 262.40).  [NOTE:  OSC's are not subject to the reporting 
                        requirements of 40 CFR 262.41-.43.] 
  
                   [NOTE:  By reason of 40 CFR 264.1(g)(8) and 265.1(c)(11), the 
                   requirements of 46 CFR 264 and 265 do not apply to immediate 
                   removal and response actions conducted by Coast Guard OSC's. 
                   Part 267 of 40 CFR does not impose any requirements on Coast 
                   Guard OSC's.  By reason of 40 CFR 270.1(c)(3), permits issued 
                   under 40 CFR 270 are not required for treatment and containment 
                   during immediate removal and response actions conducted by Coast 
                   Guard OSC's.  However, persons who dispose of the recovered waste 
                   may have to obtain permits under Part 270.]  The OSC may, in one 
 
############
  
  
  7.D.9.b.    (2)  (cont'd) situation, waive requirements imposed by RCRA 
                   regulations (see 40 CFR 263.30(b)).  When waste is discharged 
                   during transportation, the OSC, upon determining that its 
                   immediate removal is necessary to protect human health or the 
                   environment, may authorize its removal by transporters who do not 
                   have EPA identification numbers and without preparing a 
                   manifest.  It is expected that this situation will apply in most 
                   cases, subject to Coast Guard OSC control, which would otherwise 
                   be subject to identification number and manifesting 
                   requirements.  However, notwithstanding this expectation, most 
                   transportation, treatment, and disposal facilities are not 
                   familiar with the waiver authority discussed above.  Therefore, 
                   they will usually require compliance with the requirements of the 
                   regulations referred to above as being of most concern to OSC's. 
                   In addition, the NCP (40 CFR 300.65(f)) requires that, to the 
                   greatest extent possible given the exigencies of the 
                   circumstances, the OSC comply with applicable or relevant and 
                   appropriate federal public health and environmental 
                   requirements.  This includes compliance with RCRA requirements. 
  
              (3)  OSC Procedure .  In order to assure the proper and timely disposal 
                   of recovered RCRA wastes, whether subject to a possible waiver or 
                   not, OSC's shall, after determining that the recovered material 
                   is subject to RCRA, carry out the following procedure: 
  
                   (a)  Should normally, in a case where the waiver applies, and 
                        shall, in a case where it does not, assure that the 
                        transporter has obtained an EPA identification number and 
                        prepare a manifest in accordance with the instructions in 40 
                        CFR 262.20-23; 
  
                   (b)  Assure that the recovered waste has been properly packaged, 
                        labeled, marked, and placarded; 
  
                   (c)  Ensure that the recovered waste is disposed of at a 
                        permitted facility authorized by EPA for disposal of CERCLA 
                        wastes.  CERCLA waste disposal must comply with the EPA 
 
  
  
  7.D.9.b.    (3)  (cont'd) process of the OSC produces hazardous waste.  As to the 
                   second, the hazardous waste becomes subject to regulation prior 
                   to the time that the OSC takes any action with respect to it. 
                   However, during a removal or response operation the OSC exercises 
                   control over the disposal of the recovered waste.  As an element 
                   of this control, he or she performs certain functions assigned to 
                   "generators" by 40 CFR 262.] 
  
              (4)  Manifest Forms .  The manifest referred to above must meet the 
                   requirements of 40 CFR 262.20.  Note, however, that 40 CFR 262.21 
                   calls for the use of state provided manifest forms if the 
                   generator or disposal state has established specific 
                   requirements.  As of October 1984, 25 states have established 
                   specific requirements for the use of state-supplied manifest 
                   forms.  These states, with appropriate contacts, are listed in 
                   Figure 7-14.  When completing the manifest, if the source is 
                   known, the OSC should list the name of the polluter on the 
                   manifest as the generator.  If the source is unknown, the OSC 
                   should insert the words "Coast Guard Federal On-Scene 
                   Coordinator" in the space provided for the generator's name.  In 
                   either case, the manifest should be signed by the OSC or the 
                   designated representative, and marked with the statement:  "This 
                   material is being disposed of by the Coast Guard Federal On-Scene 
                   Coordinator (unit name), as part of a response action in 
                   accordance with the National Oil and Hazardous Substances 
                   Pollution Contingency Plan (40 CFR 300)." 
  
############
              (5)  Transportation For Disposal .  OSC's must ensure that all wastes 
                   shipped off-site for disposal are transported in compliance with 
                   applicable regulations.  These include the RCRA regulations in 40 
                   CFR 262-263, the DOT Hazardous Materials Regulations in 49 CFR 
 
  
  
                                 FIGURE 7-14 
  
      STATE CONTACTS FOR UNIFORM HAZARDOUS WASTE MANIFEST FORMS AND INFORMATION 
  
  The following states will require the use of a state-approved version of the 
  Uniform Hazardous Waste Manifest Form for shipments destined to their state or for 
  shipments which originate in their state, and are destined to a state which does 
  not require the use of a state modified form.  See California and Missouri for 
  exceptions. 
  
  ALABAMA (Requires generators treating, storing, or disposing of wastes in 
              Alabama to obtain the form from Alabama facilities.) 
  
      State Technical Contact:  Joe Brewer (205-271-7700) 
      Department of Environmental Management 
      State Capitol 
      Montgomery, AL  36130 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use, but facilities may decide not to supply. 
      Charge:  Contact facility 
  
  ARKANSAS  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Vicky Pruett (501-562-7444) 
      Department of Pollution Control and Ecology 
      Solid and Hazardous Waste Materials Division 
      P.O. Box 9583 
      Little Rock, AR  72219 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use and will supply. 
      Charge:  $2 per form 
  
  CALIFORNIA   (Out-of-state generators are not required to use the California state 
                  manifest form for shipments into that state.) 
  
      State Technical Contact:  Al Fong (916-322-2337) 
      State Transporter Contact:  Kit Davis (916-324-2430) 
      Department of Health Services 
      Procedures and Regulations Division 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-14 (cont'd) 
  
  DELAWARE  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Ken Weiss (302-736-4781) 
      To Request Copies:  Juanita Williamson (302-736-4781) 
      Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control 
      89 Kings Highway 
      P.O. Box 1401 
      Dover, DE  19901 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use and will supply 
      Charge:  None 
  
  GEORGIA (Requires generators treating, storing, or disposing of wastes in 
              Georgia to obtain the form from Georgia facilities.) 
  
      State Technical Contact:  Jennifer Kaduck (404-656-7802) 
      Department of Natural Resources 
      Environmental Protection Division, Land Protection Branch 
      270 Washington Street, SW 
      Atlanta, GA  30334 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use, but facilities may decide not to supply. 
      Charge:  Contact facilities 
  
  ILLINOIS  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Cindy Ladage (217-782-6761) 
      Environmental Protection Agency 
      2200 Churchill Road 
      Springfield, IL  62706 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use and will supply. 
      Charge:  None 
  
  LOUISIANA  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Joan Albritton (504-342-1227) 
      Department of Environmental Quality 
      Hazardous Waste Division 
      P.O. Box 44066 
      Baton Rouge, LA  70804 
      Continuation Sheet:  State only allows use for more than two transporters and 
                           will supply. 
      Charge:  $.50 per form 
  
  MAINE 
  
      State Technical Contact:  Richard Baker (207-289-2651) 
      Department of Environmental Protection 
      Bureau of Oil and Hazardous Materials 
      Licensing and Enforcement Division, State House - Station 17 
      Augusta, ME  04333 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use but will not supply. 
      Charge:  None 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-14 (cont'd) 
  
  MARYLAND  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Tom Battle (301-383-5734) 
      To Request Copies:  Lisa Bryson (301-383-5734) 
      Department of Health and Mental Hygiene 
      Hazardous Waste Division 
      201 West Preston Street 
      Baltimore, MD  21201 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use and will supply. 
      Charge:  $.20 per form 
  
  MASSACHUSETTS     (Form will be distributed by private vendors located in 
                       Massachusetts.) 
  
      State Technical Contact:  Sarah Weinstein (617-292-5820) 
      Department of Environmental Quality Engineering 
      One Winter Street 
      Boston, MA  02108 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use. 
      Charge:  $1 per form 
  
############
  MICHIGAN  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Marta Fisher (517-373-2730) 
      Department of Natural Resources 
      Environmental Protection Bureau 
      Hazardous Waste Division 
      Box 30028 
      Lansing, MI  48909 
      Continuation Sheet:  State only allows use for more than two transporters and 
                           will not supply. 
      Charge:  None 
  
  MINNESOTA  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Karen Ryss (612-296-7776) 
      Pollution Control Agency 
      Solid and Hazardous Waste Division 
      1935 West County Road, B2 
      Roseville, MN  55113 
      Continuation Sheet:  State only allows use for more than two transporters and 
                           will not supply. 
      Charge:  Call Karen Ryss 
  
  MISSOURI  (Regulations mandating the use of Missouri state form are pending. 
               During the interim period, any federally-approved form is acceptable, 
               provided the generator includes Missouri identification numbers prior 
               to shipment.) 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-14 (cont'd) 
  
  MISSOURI  (cont'd) 
  
      State Technical Contact:  Kirt Hilsenbeck (314-751-3241) 
      Waste Management Program 
      Department of Natural Resources 
      P.O. Box 1368 
      117 E. Dunklin Street 
      Jefferson City, MO  65102 
      Continuation Sheet:  No 
      Charge:  None 
  
  NEW HAMPSHIRE  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Dawn Channing (603-271-4608) 
      Office of Waste Management 
      Division of Public Health Services 
      Health and Welfare Building 
      Hazen Drive 
      Concord, NH  03311 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use but will not supply. 
      Charge:  None 
  
  NEW JERSEY  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Nancy Power (609-292-5189) 
      Department of Environmental Protection 
      32 E. Hanover Street, CN-028 
      Trenton, NJ  08625 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use but will not supply. 
      Charge:  None 
  
  NEW YORK  
  
      State Technical Contact:  James Moran (518-457-6858) 
      Department of Environmental Conservation 
      Division of Solid and Hazardous Waste 
      P.O. Box 12820 
      Albany, NY  12212 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use but will not supply. 
      Charge:  None 
  
  OKLAHOMA  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Al Coulter (405-271-5338) 
      Department of Health 
      Industrial and Solid Waste Service 
      P.O. Box 53551 
      Oklahoma City, OK  73152 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use and will supply. 
      Charge:  $.25 per form 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-14 (cont'd) 
  
  PENNSYLVANIA  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Jeff Beatty (717-787-9870) 
      To Request Copies:  Cheryl Mills (717-787-9870) 
      Department of Environmental Resources 
      Bureau of Solid Waste Management 
      Fulton Building 
      P.O. Box 2063 
      Harrisburg, PA  17120 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use but will not supply. 
      Charge:  $.15 per form 
  
  PUERTO RICO  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Maria Rodriguez (809-725-5140) 
      Environmental Quality Board 
      Solid, Toxic and Hazardous Waste Program 
      Box 11488 
      Santurce, PR  00910-1488 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use and will supply. 
  
  RHODE ISLAND  
  
      State Technical Contact:  Alicia Good (401-277-2797) 
      Department of Environmental Management 
      Division of Air and Hazardous Materials 
      204 Cannon Building 
      75 Davis Street 
      Providence, RI  02908 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows use and will supply, but does not 
                            encourage use. 
      Charge:  None 
  
  SOUTH CAROLINA  
  
      State Technical Contact:  "Ike" Nevesky (803-758-5681) 
      Department of Health and Environmental Control 
      Bureau of Solid and Hazardous Waste Management 
      2600 Bull Street 
      Columbia, SC  29201 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows and will supply. 
      Charge:  None 
  
  TEXAS 
  
      State Technical Contact (municipal and federal facilities): 
      Ken Zarker (512-458-7271) 
      Texas Department of Health 
      1100 West 49th Street 
      Austin, TX  78756 
                                 FIGURE 7-14 (cont'd)     TEXAS
 (cont'd) 
        State Technical Contact (commercial facilities):  Allan Seils (512-475-5647) 
      Texas Department of Water Resources 
      P.O. Box 13087 Capitol Station       Austin, TX  78711       Continuation Sheet:  State allows and will supply.       Charge:  None     VERMONT
 
  
      State Technical Contact:  John Miller (802-832-3395) 
      Agency of Environmental Conservation 
      Air and Solid Waste Programs 
      State Office Building 
      Montpelier, VT  05602 
      Continuation Sheet:  State allows and will supply. 
      Charge:  None 
  
############
  WISCONSIN  
  
      State Technical Contact:  David Charles (608-267-7551) 
      Department of Natural Resources 
      Bureau of Solid Waste Management 
      P.O. Box 8094 
      Madison, WI  53708 
      Continuation Sheet:  State will not supply. 
      Charge:  None 
  
  For further information on this list, contact: 
  
      Carolyn Barley (202-382-5235)/John Thompson (202-382-4697) 
      The RCRA/Superfund Hotline (Wash., DC area 382-3000 or 800-424-9346) 
      Environmental Protection Agency 
      Office of Solid Waste (WH-563) 
      401 M Street, SW 
      Washington, DC  20460 
 
 
  
  
  7.F.  National Strike Force (NSF) Administration .  The FWPCA 311(c)(2) requires 
      the NCP to include the establishment or designation of a strike force 
      consisting of personnel trained and prepared to carry out necessary services 
      specified in the plan.  The Coast Guard NSF is one of the Special Forces 
      available to assist OSC's whenever NSF expertise or capabilities are needed. 
      Paragraph 7.D.4 above describes the capabilities of the NSF and other Special 
      Forces, and provides guidance on when they should be activated.  This section 
      describes the administrative elements of the NSF. 
  
      1.  Administrative And Operational Control .  The NSF, comprised of the 
          Pacific, Gulf, and Atlantic Strike Teams, and the NSF Dive Team, is under 
          the operational and administrative control of the respective area 
          commander.  When responding to a spill, members are under the operational 
          control of the OSC, whether the OSC is from the Coast Guard, EPA, or 
          another federal agency.  For responses to assist state or local 
          governments, operational control is retained by the area commander. 
          Respective strike teams respond to requests for assistance within the 
          following standard federal regions: 
  
          a.  Atlantic Strike Team (AST) .  Regions I, II (excluding Puerto Rico and 
              Virgin Islands), III, V, and North Carolina; 
  
          b.  Gulf Strike Team (GST) .  Regions II (Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands), 
              IV (excluding North Carolina), VI, and VII; and 
  
          c.  Pacific Strike Team (PST) .  Regions VIII, IX, and X. 
  
          d.  NSF Dive Team .  All regions. 
  
      2.  Response Standards . 
  
          a.  Personnel Standards .  When requested by the OSC, NSF personnel will be 
              expeditiously dispatched within the following minimum standards: 
  
                   Number of Personnel          Dispatch Time  
    
                         1                     Immediately 
                         4                     Within 2 hours 
                      Up to 12                 Within 6 hours 
  
              These standards should be applied with careful judgment and 
              recognition that personnel committed to training other units or 
              participating in R&D testing may be pre-empted for a response 
              mission.  Each strike team will assist other teams, as operational 
              commitments permit.  First-class travel must not be used except in 
              extreme circumstances.  In those cases where no other class of travel 
              is available, and the travel must be performed, Commandant approval 
              must be obtained following the procedures in Chapter 2 of the Joint 
              Travel Regulations and COMDTINST M4600.8 (Series), Comptroller Manual, 
              Volume IX.  All requests for approval of first-class travel should be 
              forwarded to Commandant (G-FPS) via Commandant (G-WER) for endorsement. 
 
  
  
  7.F.2.  b.  Equipment Standards .  NSF response equipment requested by the OSC will 
              be dispatched by the most expeditious means available within 4 hours 
              of the request.  Except for operational repairs and routine 
              maintenance, equipment shall be maintained in "Ready Standby" status. 
              The equipment inventory of the NSF teams should be continually 
              evaluated against operational experience and modified accordingly. 
  
############
          c.  Foreign Assistance .  The NSF may be available to assist foreign 
              governments if those resources are not required for an incident in the 
              United States or its possessions.  The requesting government will make 
              a formal request via normal diplomatic channels to the U.S. Department 
              of State (DOS) and agree to reimburse all NSF expenses.  Commandant 
 
  
  
  7.F.3.b.    (5)  Establish and maintain a working relationship with key personnel 
                   involved in environmental protection programs through attendance 
                   at conferences, seminars, training sessions, visits, and 
                   telephone conversations; and 
  
              (6)  Maintain liaison with all representatives to the RRT's, state EPA 
                   representatives, and managers of cooperative and clean-up 
                   contractors within their area of responsibility. 
  
      4.  Training . 
  
          a.  Team Personnel .  Each strike team shall conduct unit training to 
              maintain necessary special skills and knowledge.  Team training 
              includes service schools, industry training sessions, conferences, and 
              practical experience oriented towards ship salvage, diving, damage 
              control, petroleum handling and storage, tank vessel liquid cargo and 
              fuel systems, removal techniques, handling of hazardous substances, 
              and instruction techniques.  Additionally, unit training shall include 
              the following: 
  
              (1)  Instruction on service practices, such as practical factors for 
                   advancement, first aid, safety, Coast Guard administration, and 
                   travel claim procedures; 
  
              (2)  Cross-training among enlisted ratings to enable all personnel to 
                   deploy and operate response equipment, including semiannual 
 
  
  
                               FIGURE 7-16 
  
       MINIMUM TRAINING REQUIREMENTS FOR STRIKE TEAMS AND NSF DIVE TEAM 
  
  COURSE                                           ATTENDEES  
  
                             STRIKE TEAMS 
  
  MSPOC                                            All enlisted 
 
  
  
  7.F.4.b.    (6)  NSF equipment and OSC support requirements; 
  
              (7)  Use of federal pollution funds; 
  
              (8)  Contingency planning; 
  
              (9)  Laws, regulations, and policies; and 
  
              (10) Hands-on exercises by response teams. 
  
      5.  NSF Dive Team .  The NSF Dive Team, a subunit of the AST, can assist OSC's 
          in investigating, evaluating, and monitoring pollution response cases 
          requiring diving or salvage operations.  The Dive Team can additionally 
          perform nonresponse operations in support of other Coast Guard mission 
          areas.  Capabilities include the following: 
  
          a.  Coast Guard helicopter salvage operations; 
  
          b.  Coast Guard vessel electronics and naval engineering support and 
              husbandry tasks (i.e., hull surveys, damage assessment, minor repairs, 
              assistance in drydocking); 
  
          c.  Underwater search and recovery; 
  
          d.  Enforcement of laws and treaties (ELT) (surveying abandoned and sunken 
              vessels for contraband); and 
  
          e.  Aids-to-navigation (ATON) support. 
  
          The primary mission of the Dive Team is to support the MER Program. 
          Support in other mission areas will be on a "not-to-interfere" basis and 
          all costs will be reimbursed by the requesting unit.  All activities 
          performed by the NSF Dive Team will be reflected on the Dive Team's QAR. 
  
      6.  Required Reports . 
  
          a.  Operational Status .  Each strike team shall advise the area commander 
              by priority message on the last day of each work week of the team's 
              operational status.  This message should follow the format in Figure 
 
  
  
                                FIGURE 7-17 
  
                       NSF OPERATIONAL STATUS MESSAGE FORMAT 
  
                  P 181145Z JAN 86 
                  FM COGARD NSF GULF MOBILE AL 
                  TO COMLANTAREA COGARD NEW YORK NY 
                  INFO COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DC//G-WER// 
                        Other NSF Teams 
  
                  ACCT CG-XXXXXX 
  
  UNCLAS //N16465// 
  
  SUBJ:  OPERATIONAL STATUS 
  
  1.  PERSONNEL ATTACHED     XX  List the appropriate number of personnel 
  A.  ABOARD                 XX  in each category. 
  B.  TRAINING               XX 
  C.  RESPONSE               XX 
  D.  FIELD UNIT TRAINING    XX 
  E.  R&D                    XX 
  F.  LIAISON                XX 
  G.  LEAVE                  XX 
  
############
  2.  OPERATIONAL DEPLOYMENTS AND PLANS:  List status of personnel deployed on spill 
  responses, training, or other operational activities.  For personnel deployed on 
  response, include NSF unit case number.  Also include reference to operational 
  activities anticipated for the following week. 
  
  3.  EQUIPMENT 
  A.  CASREP:  List equipment covered by CASREP's including reference to CASREP 
  number. 
  B.  DEPLOYED:  List equipment deployed on response actions including reference to 
  NSF unit case number. 
 
  
  
  7.F.6.b.    (1)  Air Deliverable Anti-Pollution Transport System (ADAPTS) prime 
                   movers and pumps; 
  
              (2)  Open Water Oil Containment and Recovery Systems; and 
  
              (3)  Mobile Command Post. 
  
          c.  Quarterly Activities Report (QAR), RCS-G-WER-14019 .  Within 15 days 
              following the end of the quarter, each strike team and the NSF Dive 
              Team shall submit the NSF QAR to Commandant (G-WER), via the area 
              commander, in the format shown in Figure 7-18. 
  
          d.  Incident Summary .  Brief, to-the-point, Incident Summaries, 
 
  
  
                                 FIGURE 7-18 
  
             SAMPLE NSF/DIVE TEAM QUARTERLY ACTIVITIES REPORT 
  
                  (UNIT)  QUARTERLY ACTIVITIES REPORT     RCS-G-WER-14019 
                     ______ Quarter         FY______ 
  
  I.  Summary 
  
      A.  External Time Use  (Away From Unit) 
  
          1.  Response                      # Of Cases    Work-Day(s)*   
  
              a.  Oil                          ______          ______ 
  
              b.  Hazardous Substance          ______          ______ 
  
              c.  Other                        ______          ______ 
  
          2.  Strike Team Training (TEMDUIN)                   ______ 
  
          3.  Training/Presentations Given By Unit             ______ 
  
          4.  Planning And Liaison                             ______ 
  
          5.  Research And Development                         ______ 
  
          6.  Diving Operations (Dive Team Only) 
  
              a.  Pollution Response           ______          ______ 
  
              b.  Other Mission Areas          ______          ______ 
  
      B.  Internal Time Use  (At Unit) 
  
          1.  Response                                       Work-Hour(s)**   
  
              a.  Administrative Support                       ______ 
  
              b.  Telephone Consultations With OSC's           ______ 
                                                         Oil/HS/Other  
  
          2.  Strike Team Training                           _/___/___  
  
          3.  Training/Presentations Given At Unit             ______ 
  
   4.  Planning And Liaison                             ______ 
 
  
  
                            FIGURE 7-18 (cont'd) 
  
          5.  Equipment Maintenance                                  Oil/HS/Other  
  
              a.  Preventive/Scheduled                               _/___/___  
  
              b.   Corrective/Unscheduled (includes 
                   maintenance while away from unit)                 _/___/___  
 
  
  
  7.F.6.e.    (3)  For monitoring of responsible party activities, either EPA or 
                   Coast Guard OSC, fund using non-incident specific CERCLA 
 
   
   
                      CHAPTER 8. COAST GUARD FIRE FIGHTING ACTIVITIES 
   
                                          CONTENTS 
   
            SECTION                                                          PAGE 
   
            8.A.             Authority                                       8-1 
   
            8.B.             Policy                                          8-1 
   
            8.C.             Restrictions                                    8-2 
            8.C.1.               Operations                                  8-2 
            8.C.2.               Personal Protection And Training            8-4 
   
            8.D.             Contingency Planning For Fire Fighting 
                             Activities                                      8-4 
            8.D.1.               Introduction                                8-4 
            8.D.2.               Content                                     8-4 
            8.D.3.               Role Of The COTP                            8-5 
            8.D.4.               Marine Firefighting Coordinator (MFC)       8-5 
            8.D.5.               Funding Of Fire Fighting Activities         8-5 
            8.D.6.               Basic Planning Considerations               8-5 
            8.D.6.a.                 Incident Notification                   8-5 
            8.D.6.b.                 Communications                          8-7 
            8.D.6.c.                 Actions Upon Notification               8-7 
            8.D.6.d.                 Use Of Cleanup Contractors              8-8 
            8.D.6.e.                 Involvement Of Pilots                   8-8 
            8.D.6.f.                 Involvement Of Salvors and 
                                     Marine Chemists                         8-8 
            8.D.6.g.                 Involvement of Marine Safety 
                                     Center Salvage Team                     8-8 
            8.D.6.h.                 Use of Vessel Traffic Services          8-9 
            8.D.7.               Response Management System                  8-9 
            8.D.7.a.                 Implementation                          8-9 
            8.D.7.b.                 Incident Size-Up                        8-9 
            8.D.7.c.                 The Command Post                        8-10 
            8.D.7.d.                 General Response Management 
                                     System Organization                     8-10 
            8.D.8.               Planning A Marine Fire Fighting Exercise    8-11 
            8.D.9.               Port Entry And Movement Of A 
                                 Burning Vessel                              8-11 
            8.D.9.a.                 Essential Considerations                8-11 
            8.D.9.b.                 Allowing Entry Or Movement Of 
                                     The Vessel                              8-12 
            8.D.9.c.                 Additional Considerations Prior To 
                                     Entry Or Movement                       8-13 
            8.D.9.d.                 Liability Factors In Consideration 
                                     Of Vessel Entry                         8-13 
            8.D.9.e.                 Considerations For Denying Entry 
                                     Or Movement                             8-13 
 
          
          
                                                CONTENTS 
          
            SECTION                                                      PAGE 
            8.E.          Fire Fighting On Vessels                       8-14 
            8.E.1.            Importance of Vessel Location              8-14 
            8.E.1.a.              Considerations for Moorage Locations   8-14 
            8.E.1.b.              Considerations for Anchorage Or 
      Grounding Locations                    8-14 
            8.E.l.c.              Intentional Sinking Of Vessels         8-14 
            8.E.2.            Operational Fire Fighting Priorities       8-15 
            8.E.2.a.              Rescue                                 8-15 
            8.E.2.b.              Exposures                              8-15 
            8.E.2.c.              Confinement                            8-15 
            8.E.2.d.              Extinguishment                         8-15 
            8.E.2.e.              Overhaul                               8-15 
            8.E.2.f.              Ventilation                            8-15 
            8.E.3.            Vessel Stability Considerations            8-16 
            8.E.3.a               Introduction                           8-16 
            8.E.3.b               Consulting Personnel                   8-16 
            8.E.3.c               Fire Fighting Factors Affecting 
      Vessel Stability                       8-17 
            8.E.3.d               Stability Affects On Fire Fighting     8-17 
            8.E.3.e               Vessel Factors Affecting Stability     8-17 
            8.E.3.f               Vessel Documentation                   8-17 
            8.E.3.g               Water Discipline                       8-18 
            8.E.3.h               Dewatering                             8-18 
            8.E.3.i               List Correction                        8-19 
            8.E.4.            Fixed Fire Fighting Systems                8-20 
            8.E.4.a.              Fire Main Systems                      8-20 
            8.E.4.b.              Water Sprinkler Systems                8-20 
            8.E.4.c.              Carbon Dioxide Systems                 8-21 
            8.E.4.d.              Halon 1301 Systems                     8-21 
            8.E.4.e.              Foam Systems                           8-22 
            8.E.4.f.              Steam Smothering Systems               8-22 
            8.E.5.            International Shore Connection             8-23 
            8.E.5.a.               Introduction                          8-23 
            8.E.5.b.              Coast Guard Enforcement                8-23 
            8.E.6.            General Tactics For Common Vessel Spaces   8-23 
            8.E.6.a.               Introduction                          8-23 
            8.E.6.b.               Public And Accommodation Spaces       8-23 
            8.E.6.c.               Engine Room And Machinery Spaces      8-24 
            8.F.          Special Considerations According To 
     Vessel Type                                    8-25 
            8.F.1.            Freight Vessels                            8-25 
            8.F.1.a.              Introduction                           8-25 
            8.F.1.b.              Dry Bulk                               8-25 
            8.F.l.c.              Break Bulk                             8-25 
            8.F.1.d.              Container                              8-26 
            8.F.1.e.              Roll-On/Roll-Off (Ro/Ro)               8-26 
            8.F.1.f.              Commercial Fishing Vessels             8-26 
 
############
          
                                                   CONTENTS 
            SECTION                                                      PAGE 
            8.F.2.            Bulk Liquid Tank Vessels                   8-27 
            8.F.2.a.              Introduction                           8-27 
            8.F.2.b.              Petroleum                              8-27 
            8.F.2.c.              Liquid Natural Gas (LNG)/ 
      Liquid Propane Gas (LPG)               8-28 
            8.F.2.d.              Chemical                               8-29 
            8.F.3.            Passenger Vessels                          8-29 
            8.F.3.a.              Introduction                           8-29 
            8.F.3.b.              Special Planning                       8-29 
            8.G.          Training                                       8-30 
            8.G.1.            Introduction                               8-30 
            8.G.2.            NFPA Standard Training                     8-31 
            8.G.3.            Follow-Up Training                         8-31 
            8.G.4.            AOR Coast Guard Personnel Resource List    8-31 
            8.G.5.            NFPA 1405, A Guide For Land-Based 
         Fire Fighters Who Respond To Marine 
         Vessel Fires                               8-31 
            8.G.4.a.              Introduction                           8-31 
            8.G.4.b.              Purpose                                8-31 
            8.G.4.c.              Defining The Coast Guard Role          8-32 
            8.G.4.d.              NFPA Publications                      8-32 
            8.G.4.e.              NFPA 1405 Familiarization              8-32 
            8.H.          Headquarters Support                           8-32 
            Figure 8-1    Outline for Annex M of the Area 
            Contingency Plan                               8-33 
 
        the freight container, obvious damage to the container 
        and/or its contents) under the exigent circumstances 
        exception.  The inspector must reasonably believe that 
        the leaking or damage involves hazmat, or otherwise poses 
        a significant risk of injury to persons or damage to property. 
 
G.  References.   The following is a list of references that may 
    be used by marine safety personnel in implementing local 
    inspection programs for containerized hazardous materials: 
 
    1.  Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (HMTA) (49 U.S.C. 
        1801, et seq.) as amended 
 
    2.  Ports and Waterways Safety Act (PWSA) (33 U.S.C. 1221, et 
        seq. ) 
 
    3.  The International Safe Container Act (ISCA) (46 U.S.C. 
        1503) 
 
    4.  International Convention for Safe Containers (ISC) 
        including 1981 and 1983 amendments 
 
    5.  International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) Code, by 
        the International Maritime Organization 
 
    6.  49 CFR Parts 100 - 180 
 
    7.  49 CFR Parts 450 - 453 
 
    8.  33 CFR Part 126 
 
    9.  33 CFR Part 160 
 
   10.  Competent Authority Notice on Container Packing 
        Certificates, published by the Research and Special 
        Programs Administration (RSPA), Department of 
        Transportation,  Federal Register Vol.58, No.249, 
        December 30, 1993 
 
   11.  COMDTINST 16200.3A, Civil Penalty Procedures 
        and Administration 
 
   12.  "A Shipper's Guide for Proper Stowage of Intermodal 
         Containers in Ocean Transport,** by the National Cargo Bureau 
 
   13.  "A Shipper's Guide to Stowage of Cargo in 
         Marine Containers," by the U.S. Maritime 
         Administration 
 
 
   14.  "Guide for Container Equipment Inspection" (Fourth 
        Edition), by the Institute of International Container 
        Lessors, LTD., Bedford, N.Y. 
 
   15.  "IMO/ILO Guidelines for Packing Cargo in Freight 
        Containers or Vehicles," by the International Maritime 
        Organization 
 
   16   "IMO Code of Safe Practice for Cargo Stowage and 
        Securing" by the International Maritime Organization 
 
   17.  Bureau of Explosives Pamphlet No. 6c, "Approved Methods 
        for Loading and Retaining Shipments of Hazardous 
        Materials for Trailer/Container on Flat Car Movements" 
 
   18.  "Cargo Containers - Their Storage, Handling and 
        Movement," by Herman D. Tabak, Cornell Maritime Press Inc. 
 
   19.  "Ocean Container Transportation:  An Operational 
        Perspective," by Mark L. Chadwin, James A. Pope, and 
        Wayne K. Talley, Taylor & Francis, New York, NY (1990) 
 
   20.  "Intermodal Freight Transportation," by Gerhardt 
        Muller, Eno Foundation for Transportation, Inc. 
 
H.  Delegate Approval Authorities For Containers.   The below 
    organizations have been delegated authority by the Commandant 
    (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard, to approve containers as complying 
    with the International Safe Container Act in accordance with 
    Title 49, U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, Part 450.  This 
    list is current as of August 9, 1996. 
 
############
    ORGANIZATION                         CODE            APPROVAL  DATE 
 
    1.   American Bureau of Shipping     AB                  6 Jun 78 
 
         ATTN:  Mr. Aris Antoniou 
         16855 Northchase Dr. 
         Houston, TX  77060-6008 
         Tel:  (713) 873-5200 
         Fax:  (713) 874-9553 
 
 
ORGANIZATION                           CODE               APPROVAL DATE  
2.  ABS Industrial                      AT                   6 Jun 78 
      Verification Services, Inc. 
    ATTN:  Mr. Aris Antoniou 
    16855 Northchase Dr. 
    Houston, TX 77060-6008 
    Tel:  (713) 873-5200 
    Fax:  (713) 874-9553 
3.  International Cargo Gear             IB                  6 Jun 78 
Bureau, Inc. 
ATTN:  Mr. Charles G. Visconti 
17 Battery Place 
New York, NY  10004 
Tel:  (212) 425-2750 
Fax:  (212) 269-9469 
4.  Marine Container Equipment          MC                   6 Jun 78 
       Certification Corp 
    ATTN:  Capt. M. W. Alien 
    160 Squankum Yellowbrook Road 
    Farmingdale, NJ 07727 
    Tel:  (908) 938-6622 
    Fax:  (908) 938-6972 
5.  B. A. Bodenheimer & Co., Inc.       BA                   17 Nov 78 
    ATTN:  Mr. Bert A. Bodenheimer 
    456 Glenbrook Rd. 
    Stamford, CT  06906 
    Tel:  (203) 324-1188 
    Fax:  (203) 324-6993 
6.  Container Transport Technology      CT                   27 Dec 79 
    ATTN:  Mr. P. W. Shahani 
    P. O. Box 99 
    Annandale, NJ 08801 
    Tel:  (908) 735-6676 
    Fax:  (908) 735-2160 
7.  Intermodal Transportation          IT                    15 Sep 80 
      Services, Inc. 
    ATTN:  Mr. E. Matthew Marks 
    Linden Plaza 
    9 Campus Drive 
    Parsippany, NJ  07054-4476 
    Tel:  (201) 993-3634 
    Fax:  (201) 993-5749 
 
ORGANIZATION                          CODE               APPROVAL DATE  
8.  C. R. Cushing & Co., Inc.         CR                   8 Sep 81 
    ATTN:  Mr. Charles R. Cushing 
    18 Vesey Street 
    New York. NY  10007 
    Tel:  (212) 964-1180 
    Fax:  (212) 285-1334 
9.  R. J. Del Pan & Co , Inc.         DP                   10 Mar 82 
    ATTN:  Mr. Lee A. Del Pan 
    No. 501 Don Alfonso Sycip Bldg. 
    U.N. Avenue Corner L. Guerrero Street 
    Ermita, Manila 
    Philippines 
    Tel:  5220066; 5210178; or 5210180 
    Fax:  (632) 5210367 
10.  Hodges Transportation, Inc.       NA                  24 Oct 88 
     Nevada Automotive Test Center 
     ATTN:  Mr. Henry C. Hodges, Jr. 
     P. 0. Box 234 
     Carson City, NV 89702 
     Tel:  (702) 882-3261 
     Fax:  (702) 882-3264 
11.  Silver Inspection Services        SI                  29 Jun 95 
     ATTN:  Mr. James R. Silver 
     2810 Todville Road 
     P. 0. Box 1124 
     Kemah, TX  77565 
     Tel:  (713) 474-7968 
     Fax:  (713) 474-7840 
12   The Hartford Steam Boiler         HB                  11 Dec 95 
       and Insurance Company 
       ATTN:  Mr. Timothy C. 
       Healy 
       One State Street 
       Hartford, CT  06102 
       Tel:  (203) 722-5150 
       Fax:  (203) 722-5530 
I.  Rescinded Delegation Approval Authority For Containers.   The 
    below organization has had its delegation authority rescinded 
    by the Commandant(G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard, to approve 
    containers as complying with the International Safe Container 
    Act in accordance with Title 49, U.S. Code of Federal 
    Regulations, Part 450.  This list is current as of August 9, 1996. 
 
 
                                                        DATE 
ORGANIZATION                    CODE                APPROVAL RESCINDED  
 
1.  Omnimodal, Inc.             OM                     13 DEC 95 
    ATTN:  Mr. Peter Canellis 
    1A Boxwood Road 
     Port Washington, NY 11050 
    Tel:  (915) 597-8641 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                 9-29 