MARINE SAFETY: OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF ACTIVITIES COMDTINST 16000.76  

  
A. INTRODUCTION  
 
This chapter consists of policies that implement the regulation of offshore activities on the U.S. Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) and the inspec tion of U.S. and foreign flagged units operating in 
the mineral and oil industry both in U.S. and foreign waters, to include vessels, MODUs, floating and fixed offshore facilities/platforms falling under Coast Guard jurisdiction.  
 In accordance with the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCSLA), 43 U.S.C. § 1331 et. seq., and numerous Memorandum of Understanding and Agreement with the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) and the Occupational Safety and Health Admini stration 
(OSHA), the Coast Guard promulgates and enforces safety and security regulations governing units, including vessels, facilities, fixed and floating production platforms, and Mobile Offshore Drilling Units (MODUs) when operating on the U.S. OCS.  With regard to MODUs specifically, the Coast Guard is responsible for the inspection of the 
MODUs hull structure, electrical system safety, lifesaving and fire fighting systems and equipment, and for verifying the unit’s crew is capable of conducting satisf actory abandon ship 
(unit) and fire drills. BSEE is responsible for the inspection and testing of the production and drilling systems and production operations of the MODU from the unit’s drill floor to the subsea well.  
 Foreign floating production units a nd MODUs may not conduct OCS activities on the U.S. OCS 
without a valid Coast Guard Certificate of Compliance (COC). In order to maintain a valid COC these units must undergo a Coast Guard examination annually. Additionally, each foreign vessel involved in OCS activities would also be subject to Port State Control authorities if the vessel enters within 12 nautical miles of the U.S. coast line.  
 
############
 
B. SCOPE OF EXAMS  
 
There are three basic regulatory authorities the Coast Guard uses to regulate MODUs and other 
units operating on the OCS: flag state, port state, and coastal state authority.  
 
 
1. Flag State  
 
a. The Coast Guard serves as the flag state for U.S. flagged units. Marine Inspectors (MIs) conduct inspections verifying the units meet domestic requirements and issue certificates attesting to the unit’s compliance with these standards. Additionally, for U.S. MODUs operating internationally and meeting the standards of the International 
Maritime Organization Code for the Construction and Equipment of MODUs (IMO MODU Code), an authorized classification society acting on behalf of the U.S. Coast Guard issues t he IMO MODU Code Safety Certificate.   
  
b. A flag state inspection is an in depth inspection based on U.S. rules and regulations. 
These inspections include extensive testing of systems and issuance of certificates.  
 
 
2. Port State  
 
a. The Port State Control (PSC) program was initiated to remove substandard ships from U.S. waters which extend to 12 nautical miles (NM) offshore. More detailed information on Coast Guard examinations conducted under the port state control authority can be f ound in MSM Vol II, Section D: Port State Control. Because 
MODUs seldom operate within the 12 NM range; however, they typically fall under 
“coastal state” authority.  
 
b. The scope of an exam performed under port state control authority on a foreign entity is more limited than one performed on a U.S. or undocumented entity. This limited 
scope is based on units having on board valid international documents issued by or on behalf of its flag state.  
 
 
3. Coastal State  
 
a. In accordance with the 2009 IMO MODU Code, the coastal state is defined as the government of the state exercising administrative control over the drilling operations of the unit. OCSLA gives the Coast Guard the jurisdiction as the coastal state over the “subsoil and seabed of the OCS appertain to the United States.” This is the authority most often exercised by the Coast Guard over foreign flagged MODUs. 
 b.  In accordance with 33 CFR 140.101(e) the Coast Guard will recognize and accept valid international certificates issued by signatories to inte rnational instruments and 
will verify compliance by spot checking compliance of any accepted certificate.  Depending on the conditions found on an OCS unit, these coastal state examinations may be more in depth than a traditional PSC examination, but will not be as stringent as flag state inspections.
 
  c. The U.S. as a coastal state allows for three inspection options for foreign flagged MODUs entering the OCS to conduct OCS activities.  These options, a, b, and c are further discussed in Section G, Chapte r 2 of this Manual. 
 
 
C. EXAMINATION /INSPECTION TEAMS  
 
1. Coastal State Exams/Inspections  
 Offshore teams should, at a minimum, contain two members for routine examinations/ 
inspections. One member must be a MODU Inspector certified with the appropriate competency (qualification). The second member should be certified as a Port State Control Examiner (PSCE). When deciding the size of the team necessary (including trainees) to perform an examination/inspection, the Marine Inspector should consider the type of exam and unit particulars (type, size, location offshore, transportation acquired, 
etc).   Deviations may be authorized at the discretion of the OCMI when determining the number and qualification level of the marine inspectors conducting the examinatio n/inspection. 
 
############
In some instances, a National Center of Expertise member, Coast Guard travelling inspector, auditor, or other technical expert may be participating in an exam/inspection.  These additional participants do not count towards the size of the te am.  
 
2. Overseas Exams/Inspections for Issuance of a COC/COI for MODUs & Floating 
OCS Facilities  
 
a. Definitions : For the purposes of this section of the Marine Safety Manual 
Volume II, COMDTINST 16000.7 (series) the following definitions applies: 
i. Receiving OCMI/Marine Inspector (MI)  –Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspections (OCMI) zone in the contiguous United States where an OCS unit will be receiving its COC or COI.  
ii. Originating OCMI /Marine Inspector (MI)  – OCMI zone in which initial 
inspection s/exams will be conducted (generally overseas).  
 
b. Travel to a Foreign Port . In preparation for the arrival of a new MODU or 
Floating OCS Facility onto the U.S. OCS, it may be necessary for Marine Inspectors (MIs) from a receiving Officer in Charge, Marin e Inspections 
(OCMI) office, to visit the vessel in the overseas shipyard while it is being constructed.  Such visits may occur as a result of a request from the owner/operator or have been initiated by the receiving OCMI/marine inspector on an as needed basis.  These visits can minimize delays for vessels that operate for the first time on the U.S. OCS, expediting the inspection process; they also open up lines of communication between industry and the Coast Guard, ensuring optimum safety compliance while construction occurs and promoting consistent enforcement of existing standards.  
 
The receiving OCMI must coordinate travel and inspection activities with the originating OCMI. It is critical that the receiving OCMI and the originating OCMI coordinate inspection activities. Receiving MIs may attend the vessel to address and verify District and receiving OCMI policies, procedures and concerns.  Also, if the OCS vessel is applying for the In Service Inspection Plan (ISIP) or Underwater Exam In Lieu of Drydock (UWILD) process, the approval process can begin in the shipyard where internal in spections and photos of 
critical inspection points (that may be exposed during construction versus when 
 onsite and in water) can be completed most efficiently. The Coast Guard will not normally perform examinations with the vessel underway.  
 
c. Travel Cost s. Inspector travel and subsistence costs must be reimbursed by the 
company.  Inspectors traveling overseas for inspections must obtain TONOs from DCO -832(UF) and must provide billing information upon completion of 
travel.  Inspectors shall contact the overseas marine inspection office or DCO -
832(UF)  for more information. For further information on the foreign travel 
request process see Foreign Travel, Passports and Visas, C OMDTINST 5000.5 
(series).  
 
d. User Fees and Reimbursable Expenses.  
(1)  46 CFR 2.10- 120; Overseas Inspection Fee.  Overseas fee (46 U.S.C. 2110, 46 
CFR 2.10- 120):  The overseas fee is applicable for these 
inspections/examinations.  The fee should be charged for each group of inspectors traveling from the states to the overseas location.  The local OCMI should ensure the fee is paid prior to travel.  There is no billing for this fee; a proof of payment receipt is provided by the company to the OCMI, (usually the lead inspector).  
 (2)  46 CFR 2.10; COI or COC Fee.   
 
############
i. COI fee (46 U.S.C. 2110, 46 CFR 2.10):  The COI fee is billed by FINCEN 
based on the unit having a valid COI.  The COI fee isn’t charged for an initial COI.  
 ii. COC fee (46 U.S.C. 2110, 46 CFR 2.10) The COC fee should be paid when 
the local OCMI office begins their examinations. The fee is paid without billing from FINCEN.  In order to prevent inadvertent interest and penalties for non -payment, a COC examination should NOT be entered in 
MISLE until the fee is paid.  
 
(3)  46 U.S.C. 3317, Reimbursable travel expenses. Reimbur sable Travel (46 
U.S.C. 3317): Travel for inspections/examinations conducted overseas must be reimbursed by the requesting company.  DCO -832(UF) manages the 
TONOs for this travel and publishes guidance annually for obtaining tonos and providing billing inf ormation for Coast Guard reimbursement.  
  
e. Application for Exam .  
 
(1) Foreign units . The owner or builder of a foreign flagged vessel being built 
overseas and applying for an examination to obtain a COC should do so at 
least 6 months prior to engaging in U.S. OCS activities by submitting:  
 
i.  A written or e- mailed request for COC examination to the receiving 
OCMI, of the marine inspection zone in which the unit intends to operate in the U.S.;  
 ii. and to the originating OCMI zone in which the inspections/exams will be coordinated; and  
 iii.  provide evidence that all applicable us er fees have been paid in full.  
 
(2) U.S. Flagged and Undocumented Units . The owner or builder of a vessel 
being built overseas and applying for an inspection to obtain a COI should do so to prior to commencing any construction or fabrication of vessels t hat 
intend to engage in U.S. OCS activities by submitting: 
 
i.   a completed A pplication for Inspection of U.S. V essel, Form CG -3752 to 
the OCMI of the marine inspection zone in which the unit intends to operate in the U.S.;  
 ii.  and to the originating O CMI zone in which the inspections/exams will be 
coordinated; and  
 iii.  submit all plans and information listed in subpart C of 46 CFR part 107 which relate to the facility.  
 
f. Full COC/COI exams for OCS vessels are not conducted overseas; however, certa in portions of new vessel trials may be witnessed by overseas Coast Guard 
inspectors as resources allow. These pre- inspection opportunities and 
subsequent results shall be coordinated and communicated with the receiving OCMI. All activities shall be docume nted in MISLE.  
 
g. Inspection Teams . The members of the teams conducting initial or pre -
COC/COI examinations at overseas locations should be coordinated through the overseas originating USCG offices (FEACT/ACTEUR). Close coordination between both the recei ving and originating OCMIs is necessary to maximize 
resource use and minimize operational delays.   Receiving OCMIs should not authorize travel without coordination with overseas originating offices. Visits by receiving Marine Inspectors could last 1 to 2 weeks depending on the testing  
 being conducted and how many inspectors participate. The number of receiving marine inspectors travelling to the overseas location should be based on the technical difficulty and type of equipment exams/inspections the team is expected to complete during their visit. The inspection team should be comprised of 4 to 6 Coast Guard MIs. The inspection team should consist of at least one MI from the receiving OCMI office and any other personnel deemed necessary by the receiving O CMI to complete the necessary inspections, which 
may include members from the Marine Safety Center (MSC), CG Headquarters (HQ), the OCS National Center of Expertise (NCOE) and the overseas MI offices.  Coordination with the originating OCMI managing projec t officer 
should be a priority.  
 
############
h. Scope of the exams/inspections . The first of these pre- exams/inspections during 
the construction phase has been known to commence as far in advance as 6 months prior to arrival on the OCS, with the last two months prior to arrival being the most critical in that MIs can witness testing of critical systems (such as life saving and firefighting). At the final exam/visit, by receiving MIs, a handoff from the originating OCMI to the receiving OCMI should occur. Any MISLE activities generated by the originating offices should be marked closed and 
transferred to the receiving OCMI.  
 
i. Request for Examination/Inspection . The vessel owner/operator considering an 
overseas examination should submit a request in writing to the originating OCMI and the receiving OCMI in the zone the unit will eventually be located.  Vessel operators requesting a COI should utilize the Applica tion for Inspection 
of U.S. Vessel, Form CG -3752. Requests for a COC exam should include the 
following information:  
 
(1) Status of plan review by MSC, including any unresolved plan review 
comments;  
 (2) Stage of vessel construction and delivery date;  
 
(3) Suggested location and dates for the inspection;  
 
(4) One Company point of contact (to represent the company and all 
subcontractors);  
 
(5) Acknowledgment to reimburse the Coast Guard for all expenses incurred;               
and  
 
(6) The general inform ation about the vessel:  
 (a) Name of vessel (including former name(s) for existing vessels);  
 
(b) Vessel type (class notation being issued: FPSO, MODU, etc…)  
 
(c) IMO Number;  
 
(d) Building contract date, keel laying date, delivery date;  
 
(e) Country of registry;  
 
(f) Classification Society;  
 
(g) Total numbers of passengers (if any) and crew;  
 
(h) Gross tonnage, length, breadth, depth, and speed;  
 
(i) Fire Protection Method and SOLAS Convention to which the vessel was 
built, including a mendments; and  
 
(j) Major modification information (if any) to include: dates, locations, and 
SOLAS Convention to which the vessel was modified;  
 
When a new construction project is beginning, the originating overseas CG 
inspections offices (FEACT/ACTEUR)  shall be the initial point of contact for 
inspections and questions. If the area on the U.S. OCS in which the vessel will be 
operating is known, the receiving OCMI office should also be contacted for any specific District or OCMI policy questions.  
 
j. Inspection Schedule Plan . The receiving and originating MIs should coordinate a 
written plan for conducting the expected exams on the overseas visit to provide 
the sequence of examinations such that the inspectors, flag state, classification society, owner’s representatives and all other interested parties will be ready to perform their duties and responsibilities efficiently during the visit. It is understood that this schedule is subject to change due to weather and unpredictable phases of construction of t he unit at the building site. Before the 
examinations/inspections take place aboard the vessel/unit, the inspectors, Administration representatives, designers, or owner’s representatives should meet to discuss the scope of the examination/inspection and preparation details. Receiving OCMI MIs should not limit their exam/inspection to a job aid; if there is reason to believe that the vessel’s safety equipment or material condition is substandard, a more in depth exam/inspection/drill should be conducted.  
 
############
k. Issuance of Certificates . NO formal paperwork is issued to the owner or 
operator by the receiving or originating OCMI during these overseas pre-
 inspection/exam visits. These visits are in preparation for issuance of the COC/COI once the vessel gets to the U.S. OCS.  
 
l. MISLE . One MISLE activity shall be opened for the vessel by the originating 
OCMI. All Team members shall be included in the entry. Do NOT create a COC exam in MISLE until the unit/vessel is located within the receiving unit’s AOR and the COC  fee has been paid. Starting this casework early causes the USCG 
Finance Center (FINCEN) to create a bill, which immediately accrues interest and penalties, which are not warranted if the unit is under construction. Initial MISLE Inspection Type entries sh all be as follows: 
 
i. For a COI Inspection: New Construction  
ii. For a COC -MODU: Admin  
iii. For a COC FPSO: New Construction  
 
There shall not be any pre -COC exams for foreign flagged MODUs. For all 
other inspection types listed above, as the originating MIs visit the vessel, a running log shall be maintained, with  all documents and  photographs scanned into MISLE, to document the progress and give the receiving unit’s MIs a current and coordinated inspection documentation package. Once the vessel departs  the originating unit’s AOR then the activity shall be closed and the 
receiving unit can begin the normal COC/COI Inspection process. Casework shall follow as directed in the MISLE Data Entry Requirements for Foreign Vessel Arrivals, Examinations and Opera tional Controls and the MISLE Data 
Entry Requirements for Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Inspections.  
 
m. Appeals .  If an owner or operator of a vessel does not agree with a Coast Guard 
decision resulting from plan review or from an examination, a formal ap peal of 
that decision may be made in accordance with the procedures contained in 46 CFR 1.03. Commandant (CG -CVC- 2) will serve as the point of contact for 
questions related to the procedures and guidance contained herein.  
 
 
 
 
D. REGULATORY AUTHORITIES  
 
 
1. OCSLA: 43 U.S.C. § 1331  
 
The Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act ( OCSLA) (43 U.S.C. § 1333(d)(1) et seq.) gives the  
 
Coast Guard jurisdiction over the subsoil and seabed of the OCS appertain to the United 
 States and waters adjacent to including vessels engaged in OCS activities.  
 
More specifically, 43 U.S.C. § 1333(d) (1), authorizes the Coast Guard to create and enforce regulations to ensure safety of life and property on the OCS. 
 
 
2. Vessels subject to inspection: 46 U.S.C. § 3301 
 
This statute  requires that seagoing motor vessels be inspected by the Coast Guard. These 
vessels must meet the requirements of 46 CFR Subchapter I -A and 33 CFR Subchapter N 
when working on the U.S. OCS. 
 
 
3. Classification Societies: 46 U.S.C. § 3316 
 
 The Coast Guard  may accept certain flag State statutory certificates issued to U.S. flagged 
vessels by authorized classification societies or recognized organizations (ROs), such as the 
American Bureau of Shipping (ABS). The Coast Guard retains the responsibility for iss uing 
the Certificate of Inspection (COI); however, a RO may participate in the plan review and inspections necessary for issuance of this certificate. Title 46 CFR Part 8 provides detailed regulations for the Alternate Compliance Program (ACP). See this Ma nual, Section G, 
Chapter 2, for additional information.  
 
############
 
E. INTERAGENCY AGREEMENTS  
 
 
1. OSHA and Coast Guard MOU History  
 
a. On 19 December 1979, the Coast Guard and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) signed an MOU that gave the agencies joint responsibility for the occupational safety and health of personnel on OCS facilities. The purpose of this MOU was to establish procedures to increase consultation and coordination between the Coast Guard and OSHA with respect to matters affecting the occupational safety and health of personnel working on the OCS of the United States.  The two agencies agreed to observe the following procedures in carrying out their responsibilities regarding development and promulgation of standards and enfor cement of regulations and standards. 
 
b. In 1983, the two agencies entered into a second MOU that defined the responsibilities of each agency with respect to Coast Guard certificated vessels.  The 1983 MOU outlined the statutory authorities of each agency to prescribe and enforce standards or regulations affecting the occupational safety and health of seamen aboard vessels, including MODUs that are inspected and certificated by the Coast Guard.  
  
 The 1983 MOU also clarifies the Coast Guard will enforce the Occupational Safety 
and Health Act with respect to the working conditions of seamen aboard inspected vessels. However, OSHA retained the authority over discrimination cases on inspected vessels.  
 
 A foreign MODU operating under the authority of a COC issue d by the Coast Guard 
is considered "an inspected and certificated vessel" for the purposes of the 1983 
MOU with OSHA.  
 c. The Coast Guard has primary authority for OCS worker safety; however, OSHA is available to assist in areas of their expertise.   
 
2. BSEE and Coast Guard MOU/MOA History  
 
a. A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was signed November 27, 2012 between the Director of the BSEE and the Deputy Commandant for Operations (DCO) of the United States Coast Guard. The purpose of the MOU is to promote interagency consistency in the regulation of OCS activities, facilities and units under the respective jurisdiction of the BSEE and Coast Guard, minimize duplication of effort and aid participating agencies in the successful completion of their assigned mi ssions 
and responsibilities. The goal is to promote safety of life and property and the protection of the environment. On 1 October 2011, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE), formerly the Minerals Management Service ( MMS), was replaced by the Bureau of Ocean Energy 
Management (BOEM) and the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) as part of a major reorganization.  
 b. Key regulators from the Coast Guard and BSEE headquarters meet quarterly to discuss the following objectives as it relates to the MOU: 
 
(1) Fostering communication and cooperation between the participating agencies. 
 (2) Promoting compliance with applicable regulations. 
 (3) Optimizing use of expertise and resources, as well as coordinating efforts with respect to offshore safety and environmental protection. 
 (4) Developing common, compatible regulations and policies. 
 
(5) Encouraging adoption of similar codes and standards. 
 (6) Providing appropriate oversight and taking effective enforcement actions.  
 
c. To help meet the above objectives and that of the MOU, and to address lessons learned from the collection of Deepwater Horizon investigations and after -action 
reports, the Coast Guard and BSEE formed both a Response workgroup (char ter 
signed in 11 January 2011) and a Prevention workgroup (charter signed 11 August  2012). 
 
############
(1) The Response Workgroup’s ultimate goal is to improve national oil discharge planning, preparedness, and response for facilities located seaward of the coastline through improved alignment of BSEE and Coast Guard regulatory authorities and preparedness oversight activities.  
 (2) The Prevention Workgroup’s goal is to optimize the safety of those engaged in oil and gas exploration, development, and producti on on the OCS through focused 
interagency communications and alignment of Coast Guard and BSEE operations and activities.  
 
d. The MOU established the framework for six Memorandums of Agreement (MOAs).  
 
(1) OCS -01 Agency Responsibilities (effective 30 Septe mber 2004)  
 (2) OCS -02 Civil Penalties (effective 12 September 2006)  
 (3) OCS -03 Oil Discharge Planning, Preparedness, and Response (effective 03 April  
2012)  
 (4) OCS -04 Floating Offshore Facilities (effective 28 February 2008)  
 (5) OCS -05 Incident Inves tigations (effective 27 March 2009)  
 (6) OCS -06 Offshore Renewable Energy Installations on the OCS (effective 27 July 
2011)  
 (7) OCS -07 Safety and Environmental Management Systems (SEMS) and Safety 
Management Systems (SMS) (effective 30 April 2013)  
 (8) OCS -08 Mobile Offshore Drilling Units (MODUs) (effective 04 June 13)  
 
 
F.  VESSEL CERTIFICATES OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (COFR S) AND OIL SPILL 
FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (OSFR)  
 
The COFR program is managed by the Coast Guard and inspectors should be verifying that a vessel has on board the documentation required by 33 CFR 138, Subpart A. For more 
 information on the COFR see the National Pollution Fund Center website at: 
http://www .uscg.mil/npfc/COFRs/. This part only applies to vessels, which includes MODU's 
when they meet the applicability found in 33 CFR 138.15(b).  Pollution liability for offshore facilities is covered under BOEM's regulations found in 30 CFR 553 -  Oil Spill Fin ancial Responsibility (OSFR) for Offshore Facilities. For more information on 
the OSFR see: www.boem.gov/Oil -Spill- Financial -Responsibility -OSFR /.
  A facility that meets 
the definition of a "covered offshore facility (COF)" as defined in 30 CFR 553.3 must meet the requirements of this part as applicable (30 CFR 553.10).  It is important to note that MODU's may be required to meet the requirements in 33 CFR part 138 and 30 CFR part 553 depending on their operations.  
 BOEM does not issue any type of documenta tion nor do they require the owner/operator of 
COF's to maintain proof of financial responsibility on board. Their process involves an annual 
verification that financial responsibility remains intact. If an inspector questions whether or not a 
COF has OSFR coverage they may contact BOEM at 504 -736-2600 for confirmation. 
 
 
G.  JONES ACT 
 
The Jones Act applies only to the carriage of U.S. goods between U.S. ports. A foreign vessel can provide any service to one or more U.S. ports if that service does not incl ude the transport, 
loading and offloading of U.S. merchandise.  Current interpretation and application of the Jones  ct by the Customs and Border Patrol (CBP), the agency responsible for determinations on Jones 
Act applicability, permits both foreign and domestic vessels to engage in activity on the OCS.  Although the Jones Act prohibits the transportation of merchandise by foreign vessels between coastwise places (including between the U.S. and offshore drilling facilities), the standing CBP ruling determines that OCS supply vessels move “vessel equipment” rather than transport “merchandise”.   
 
############
See this Manual, Section B,  Chapters 1 and 4 for additional information on coastwise trade and 
Jones Act Status.  
 
 
H. PERSONNEL  
 
 
1. Determining Which Personnel May be Employed on a Unit Engaged in an OCS 
Activity  
 
a. Applicability. OCSLA and its implementing regulations in 33 CFR 141 set forth the restrictions on employment of personnel on an OCS unit when that unit is engaged in an OCS Activity.  The regulations apply to majority U.S.- owned units that are 
 foreign- flagged.  They may also apply to a foreign- flagged vessel that is own ed or 
controlled by a foreign company if the Commandant determines that there is a 
majority U.S. interest in any company in the chain- of-ownership or control of that 
vessel.  The regulations do not apply to U.S. documented vessels subject to the citizenshi p requirements of 46 U.S.C. 8103; therefore, these requests will be denied. 
 
b. Authorization to Employ Certain Persons.  In general, the regulations authorize the Coast Guard to determine the use of a foreign national by an employer on a unit engaged in a n OCS Activity.  Specifically, where a determination is made, it will 
conclude whether or not a position to be filled by a foreign national is part of the regular complement of the OCS unit.  If a position is part of the regular complement, then Commandant  (CG- CVC) will process the employer’s request; if, however, the 
position is determined not to be regular complement, then the OCMI will be responsible for processing the request in accordance with H.2.d. of this chapter, below. 
 
 
2. Guidance for Processing  a Determination Request  
 In addition to the regulations, the following guidance has been published:  
 a.  NVIC 7 -84 addresses the applicability of the regulations to a) a vessel with a majority 
U.S. interest (either ownership or control) and b) to the employment of a foreign national in a position determined to be part of the regular complement of the unit.  These requests will be processed by Commandant (CG -CVC).  
 
b. Commandant (CG -CVC) is responsible for processing the four classes of exemptions 
listed in NVIC 7 -84, as these exemptions require a Coast Guard legal determination 
or coordination with the Department of Labor. Commandant (CG -CVC) also receives 
exemption requests from industry to determine whether or not personnel are considered “specialists, professionals or technically trained personnel called in to handle emergencies or other temporary operations” as defined in 33 CFR 141.15(b).  33 CFR 141.15(c) authorizes the OCMI to determine whether a particular individual or position is part of the re gular complement of a unit as defined in 33 CFR 
141.15(b). 
 
c. Commandant (CG -CVC) will forward all OCS “regular complement of crew” 
determination request to the local OCMI for determination per 33 CFR 141.15(c). If a unit receives an exemption request tha t falls into any of the other classes listed in 
NVIC 7 -84, forward it to Commandant (CG -CVC).  
 
d. Specialists, professionals and technically trained personnel called in to handle emergencies; temporary operations; or repairs are typically NOT considered to  be 
part of the regular crew complement of a unit.  However, each request shall be 
 handled on a case -by-case basis.  Some of the factors that shall be considered when 
making these determinations are:  
 
############
(1) job description relative to the unit; 
 
(2) the peri od of time requested or anticipated;  
 (3) type of operations (i.e., emergency, specialized);  
 (4) degree of expertise or training needed; and 
 (5) safety considerations.  
 
e. The following examples are provided for clarification:  
 
(1) A commercial diver temporarily aboard a MODU or platform for emergency repairs or inspection services would NOT be considered a part of the regular crew complement of a unit. However, a commercial diver aboard a dive support vessel (DSV) would be considered a part of the regular crew complement since commercial divers are normally employed aboard DSV’s.  
 (2) A weld inspection technician periodically aboard a pipe -lay barge to ensure 
quality assurance or to operate equipment that requires specialized training would NOT be cons idered a part of the regular crew complement of a unit. 
However, a welder aboard a pipe -lay barge would be considered a part of the 
regular crew compliment since welders (industrial personnel) are normally employed on this type of vessel. 
 (3) A petroleum engineer or consultant temporarily aboard a MODU during well logging or specialized drilling operations would NOT be considered a part of the regular crew complement of a unit. However, an assistant driller or rig electrician would be considered a part of the regular crew complement of a unit since these positions are normally employed aboard this type of vessel. 
 
f. The OCMI letter of determination on a position(s) shall be sent to the requestor. The 
local OCMI will maintain a file of all letters issued fo r future accessibility, in 
accordance with the CG correspondence manual and unit needs.  
 
 
I. POST HURRICANE AND NATURAL DISASTER INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS  
 
In order to ensure offshore structures in hurricane -affected areas remain in good working order 
in the aftermath of a hurricane or natural disaster, BSEE and the Coast Guard have established 
 criteria that trigger a post hurricane inspection and the degree of exam to be required. This 
information is applicable to all MODUs and certificated floating production facilities operating on the U.S. OCS.  This does not apply to Floating Production, Storage, and Offloading (FPSO) vessels or other ship -shaped OCS faci lities, including drill ships.  
 
 
1. Fixed OCS Facilities  
 
a. Per 33 CFR 140.101, the Department of Interior (Bureau of Safety and Environmental Management (BSEE)), may perform inspections on behalf of the Coast Guard on all fixed OCS platforms and structures engaged in OCS activities.  
 b. BSEE will consult with Coa st Guard District Offices or the cognizant OCMI with 
issues regarding interpretation or application of these regulations.  
 c. Chapter 5 of this Section (G) provides guidance and clarifies the Coast Guard and BSEE responsibilities with respect to Fixed Platform Inspections. 
 
 
2. Floating Facilities and MODU’s  
 
a. Floating facilities such as Semi -submersibles, Tension Leg Platforms (TLPs), Mini 
TLPs and SPARs, will initiate an out of cycle underwater and internal structural 
inspection to assess the post storm  condition if that facility experienced a passing 
weather system that:  
 
(1) causes an evacuation of a facility and  
 (2) had wave damage to topside structures.  
 
############
b. 25% of underwater critical areas and 25% of internal structures must be examined within 30 days of return of a facility to operation. The areas selected for examination should give consideration to the aspect of the storm relative to the facility or topside damage.  
 c. At the discretion of the OCMI, there may be a credit for these post -storm ins pections 
towards the next scheduled underwater hull and internal structural inspections. 
 d. If a weather event causes the evacuation of a facility, the inspection can be waived at the discretion of the local OCMI if the company can provide evidence that t he local 
wave heights were not extreme as compared to normal operations.  
 
 
3. Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE)  
  
a. BSEE has issued a post -hurricane inspection and reporting requirements Notice to 
Leasees (NTL) No.2009- G30 : http://www. bsee.gov/Regulations -and-
Guidance/Notices- to-Lessees/2009/09 -G30/ . 
 
b. Pursuant to 30 CFR 250.919(b), if any structure has been exposed to a natural 
occurrence such as a hurricane, tropical storm, or earthquake, the BSEE Regional 
Supervisor may require the  facility to submit an initial report of all structural damage, 
followed by additional updates. 
 
c.  Following the passage of a hurricane, BSEE will define and issue, via NTL, the 
affected area.  All inspected floating production facilties  in the affected area are 
subject to the policy.  Facilities outside the affected area are also required to 
report any damage sustained per 33 CFR Part 146.30. 
 
 J. C
ONFINED SPACE ENTRY  
 
 1. Regulations  
 
a. Confined space entry is discussed in Marine Safet y Manual, Volume 1, 
Administration and Management, COMDINST M16000.6 (series), Chapter 10. 
 
b. Confined space entry by Marine Safety personnel is covered under OSHA’s regulations governing shipyard employment, specifically 29 CFR 1915, Subpart B; Confined and Enclosed Spaces and Other Dangerous Atmospheres in Shipyard Employment. The applicability of this regulation includes all shipyard employment, including vessels, vessel sections and shore side operations, regardless of location.  
 c. 
The general Coast G uard policy for entry and work by personnel in confined spaces and 
atmospheric testing requirements are found in Chapter 6 of the Safety and Environmental 
Health Manual, COMDTINST M5100.47 (series). See also Appendix D of MSM Vol 1 
Chapter 10 for the Comma ndant Office of Commercial Vessel Compliance (CG -CVC) 
confined space entry policy questions and answers. 
 
d. Appendix A of MSM Vol I Chapter 10 contains standard Safe Work Practices (SWPs), however, experience has shown that due to area specific or local c onditions these SWP’s 
do not necessarily cover all hazards that may be associated with specific activities.  
Commanding Officers have the authority to develop alternative SWP’s based on local 
conditions. All alternative SWP’s must be reviewed by a Coast Guard health and safety professional from the respective Health, Safety, Work-Life Commandant (CG -11) staff 
or the detached Safety and Environmental Health Officer (SEHO) located at the HSWL Service Center Field Office (HSWL SCFO) http://www.uscg.mil/hswlsc/  Any alternative 
 SWP that is developed should also be included in the unit’s written safety and 
occupational health program.  
 
############
 
2. Marine Chemist Availability for Overseas Inspections 
 
Overseas inspections present a unique problem, in that NFPA Marine Chemists are not 
always readily available to certify spaces overseas. When no Marine Chemist or other authorized person designated by the OCMI is available, the inspection should be made by the senior vessel officer present.  
 
a. When none of the vessel's officers are present, as in the case of most vessels in foreign shipyards, the inspector must be extremely cautious. A confined space must not be entered unless it has been satisfactorily tested.  
 
b. It is the responsibility of the owner to make his or her  vessel available for inspection, 
and this includes ensuring safe atmospheres for internal inspections.  
 c. While almost all foreign yards employ persons to inspect and certify conditions in 
and adjacent to those spaces undergoing repair, their level of expertise varies widely. 
In this environment, marine inspectors must be provided the training and equipment 
that allow them to make independent decisions on confined space entry. 
 d. OCMIs should be keenly aware of the unique hazards which their inspectors f ace 
when working overseas and endeavor to ensure adequate training is afforded 
personnel working in this environment. 
 
e. Local Policy. Per MSM Vol I, Chapter 10, Appendix D: When a Marine Chemist is 
not available, such as for overseas inspections, inspect ions in remote areas or 
inspections on small passenger vessels, fishing vessels, etc., Commanding Officers 
may develop local policy following the guidelines in Appendix B (of Vol I, Chapter 
10) to train and designate unit personnel to perform as competent persons. The 
requirements of 29 CFR 1915 still apply and must be adhered to in developing local policy. The cognizant SEHO shall be consulted when developing this policy and is required to review and approve the policy before it is implemented. 
 
 
K. PORTAB LE ACCOMODATION MODULES  
 
With the increased activity in the exploration and exploitation of mineral and oil resources on the Outer Continental shelf regions of the U.S., there has been an increase in the use of portable accommodation modules on vessels operating in support of thes e activities such as MODUs and 
floating OCS facilities (SPAR, TLPs, etc.). Due to the hazards associated with the offshore industry, the safety of the host vessel and the personnel on board must not be compromised by the installation and occupation of port able accommodation modules. Personnel that occupy 
 portable accommodation modules should be afforded the same level of safety as personnel that 
occupy similar spaces located in permanent accommodations on board the host vessel.    A portable accommodation module is any non- integral enclosed space that is installed on a host 
vessel, which may be any Coast Guard inspected vessel or floating facility.  They are often living quarters, medical treatment rooms, recreational spaces, toilet s and washrooms, offices, or other 
similar spaces.   
 
 
1. Plan Review  
 
All plan review will be conducted and guidelines for the design and construction of portable 
accommodation modules can be obtained from the USCG Marine Safety Center. The Coast Guard does not conduct plan review of portable crew shelters for exclusive use on fixed platforms. The exception to this policy is any portable shelter installation aboard any fixed OCS facility maintaining a Coast Guard COI.  
 
############
 
2. OCMI Inspection Standards  
 
The O CMI should ensure portable accommodation modules are properly designed and 
constructed. The modules must satisfy the minimum structural, fire protection, habitability, 
egress, electrical, piping, fire detection, general alarm, and other safety design stand ards 
applicable to the host vessel.  If a module is intended for use on board different types of host vessels, the owner of the module should design the module to meet the most stringent host vessel standards (e.g., If the host vessel is certificated under  Subchapter I -A, then the 
portable accommodation modules onboard, must meet the standards of I -A as well. If the 
host vessel is certificated for standards under subchapter L and I, then the more stringent of the two standards will apply to the accommodation modules onboard.).   
 
The OCMI should ensure portable accommodation modules are properly installed on board a host vessel before the vessel is permitted to operate and the modules are occupied.  This includes the arrangement of the modules relative to ot her existing equipment (e.g., 
ventilation and hazardous areas), means of securing, suitability of the supporting deck structure, impact on the host vessel’s stability, and integration with the host vessel’s electrical, fire detection, general alarm system,  water supply and other hotel services.  In 
addition, OCMIs and vessel operators should be aware that the installation or removal of a portable accommodation module may have tonnage implications and the host vessel may need to be re -measured.   
 
 
3. MISLE Data Entry  
  
Each portable accommodation module is assigned a Coast Guard Number, and is tracked in MISLE. All documentation for approval of the portable accommodation modules, including approval letters and any plans submitted for approval, shall be included in the documentation section in MISLE, by whoever approves and reviews such written material. Similarly, all documentation for the installation of the portable accommodation modules shall be included in the documentation section of the host vessel . 
 A notation in the narrative of the MISLE casework is sufficient documentation that the MI inspected the unit or the installation.  An example narrative entry for an installation in the MISLE Activity for the COI or COC may be:  
“The (insert CG number) p ortable accommodation modules on (insert vessel/unit name) 
were inspected on (insert date) and the installation met the host vessel inspection requirements for subchapter (insert inspection subchapter (I/I- A/N/L etc…)).  
 
 
 
L. MISLE  CASEWORK DOCUMENTATION  
 
This section is not intended to provide a detailed instruction on how to use MISLE, as the MISLEnet ( http://mislenet.osc.uscg.mil/) website provides various user guides and “how to” tutorials.  See also the MISLE Data Entry Requirements for Foreign Vessel Arrivals, Examinations and Operational Controls and the MISLE Data Entry Requirements for Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Inspections.  
 
 
M. PROCESSING OF VIOLATION CASES  
 
Violation cases must be processed in accordance with the procedures in Marine Safety 
Manual, Volume V, Investigations and Enforcement, COMDTINST M16000.10 (series). All suspected violations discovered during Coast Guard inspection activities or through other means must be thoroughly investigated by the Coast Guard following the guidance in 33 CFR Subpart 1.07, 33 CFR 140.40 and USCG Marine Safety Manual Volume V, Investigations and Enforcement, COMDTINST M16000.10 (series). 
 
############
 
N. POLLUTION PREVENTION  
 
 
1. MARPOL Requirements 
 
To clarify the MARPOL requirements for MODUs on the OCS the diagra m 1 on page G1-
18. A larger printable version of the MARPOL Job Aid can be found on the Commandant 
 (CG- CVC- 2) website within the Outer Continental Shelf mission on CG Homeport: 
https://homeport.uscg.mil.  
 
Definitions  for diagram 1 below : 
 
Ship  means a vessel of any type whatsoever operating in the marine environment and 
includes hydrofoil boats, air -cushioned vehicles, submersibles, floating craft and fixed or 
floating platforms.  
 Oil tanker  means a ship constructed or adapted primarily to carr y oil in bulk in its cargo 
spaces and includes combination carriers, any "NLS tankers" as defined in Annex II and 
any gas carrier as defined in regulation 3.20 of chapter II -1 of SOLAS 74 (as amended), 
when carrying a cargo or part cargo of oil in bulk. 
 
Fixed or floating platforms  including drilling rigs, floating production, storage and 
offloading facilities (FPSOs) used for the offshore production and storage of oil, and 
floating storage units (FSUs) used for the offshore storage of produced oil.
 
 
 
2. Oil Record Books (ORB)/Oily Water Separators (OWS) and the International Oil 
Pollution Prevention Certificate (IOPP) 
 
Most offshore units have OWS onboard which must comply with the IOPP certificate. These 
OWS's are onboard to process deck drains related to  the industrial process. If onboard strictly 
to process deck drains or by- products of the industrial process, the OWS may not fall under 
the definition of ‘Machinery Space Operations’ or the provisions associated with the same.   
Marine Inspectors should ensure that, like ensured during a Port State Exam, the "on deck" machinery  matches the documentation provided.  Larger MODUs are known to have 
multiple OWSs and the IOPP should denote this. Note t he current  IOPP Certificate 
Supplement has no place for additional OWS units. The Marine Inspector should indicate on the Certificate Supplement any additional OWSs onboard and their rated throughputs .  
 
Examples: Some Semi -Sub MODUs have 4 OWS installations (one in each column) 
which are the same. Some other Semi -Subs have 2 OWS units (one in the center column 
of each side) and 1 or 2 units installed on the deck (one may process machinery space 
operations related fluids and the other may only process industrial process fluids). Drillships will typically have 2 OWS  units (one aft and one forward, often different sized 
units). Jack -Ups may have OWS units installed strictly for the industrial side.  
 
Marine Inspectors should look at the ORB entries on offshore units carefully. 550- Gal ‘Tote 
Tanks’ are used to transport  oils, fuels, chemicals and wastes to/from MODUs. These are 
often overlooked within ORB entries. The tote is technically cargo while stored onboard. 
Striking oil from the tote tank into the vessel should be logged as a bunkering operation, but 
 often it is not. Oil changes sometimes go directly to a waste oil tote tank; this should also be 
logged in the ORB, but often is not.   
 
3. MARPOL Annex V 
 This Annex applies to all ships, which includes, but is not limited to MODUs, fixed and floating platforms. The discharge into the sea of any  garbage is prohibited from fixed or 
floating platforms, and from all other ships  when alongside or  within 500 m of such 
platforms. Food waste may be discharged into the sea from  fixed or floating platforms located more than 12 NM  from the nearest land and from all other ships  when alongside or  
within 500 m of such platforms, but only when the wastes have been passed through a comminuter  or  grinder. Such comminuted or ground food waste shall be capable of passing 
through a screen with openings no greater than 25mm.  The record keeping (garbage record book) requirement may be waived by the Administration for fixed or floating platforms while they are engaged in exploration and exploitation of the sea -bed.  
 The requirements for garbage pollution found in 33 CFR 151.51- 151.77 apply to all U.S. 
registered vessels and foreign vessels while in the navigable waters of the United States or the Exclusive Economic Zone. These regulations do NOT apply to any other shi p specifically 
excluded by MARPOL 73/78. Where U.S. regulations differ from MARPOL is the requirement to maintain a garbage record book. Per 33 CFR 151.55, all manned ocean going vessels of 400 GT and above engaged in commerce and documented under the laws  of the 
United States and every manned fixed or floating platform subject to the jurisdiction of the United States must maintain a garbage record book.   For additional information on  Annex V requirements see this Manual, Section E, Chapter 1, diagram 2 below and the 2012 IMO Guidelines for the Implementation of MARPOL Annex, V.  
 
############
 
4. Additional Restrictions  
 
There are no additional equipment requirements for MODUs or fixed OCS facilities. 
However the following restrictions apply: 
 
a. The EPA issues Nation al Pollution Discharge Elimination (NPDES) permits to 
MODUs and Fixed Platforms in accordance with 40 CFR 122.2 and the EPA / Coast Guard MOU (dated February 11, 2011). MODUs and Fixed Platforms that operate in accordance with their NPDES permits are in fu ll compliance 
with MARPOL 73/78. 
 
(1) Marine Inspectors are encouraged to review a MODU's or Fixed Platform's NPDES permit. Extreme caution should be used in determining whether or not they are in compliance with their permit. The NPDES permit is very 
 specific as to the types of substances (both oils and Noxious Liquid Substances (NLS)) allowed to discharge and the amounts.  
 
(2) If a MODU or Platform is not operating under its NPDES permit, all 
provisions of MARPOL 73/78 and the limitations found in 33 CFR 151.10 are applicable.  
 
b. Control of Oil Discharges . All MODUs operating (not en route) within 12 
nautical miles of nearest land or within a special area and all fixed platforms within 12 nautical miles of nearest land must: 
 
(1) Have a means by which to retain all machinery oily mixtures from the platform machinery space and be equipped to discharge oily mixtures for transport to a reception facility; or,  
 (2) Be equipped to discharge in accordance with 33 CFR 151.10 paragraphs (b)(3), (b)(4) and (b)(5).  
  
Diagram 1: MARPOL Annex Applicability (Larger diagram available on HOMEPORT .) 
MARPOL 
Annex CATEGORYEFFECTIVE 
DATEAPPLICATION COMPLIANCEOCS 
Applicable
IPrevention of pollution by             
OIL02-Oct-83 Applies to all ships Mandatory YES
IIControl of pollution by             
Noxious Liquid 
Substances (NLS) in bulk06-Apr-87Applies to all ships certified to 
carry NLS in bulk, regardless 
of GT.MandatoryYES, if 
certified  to 
carry NLS.
IIIPrevention of pollution by             
harmful substances 
carried by sea in 
PACKAGED form01-Jul-92 Applies to all ships.  1Optional 2Optional 2
IVPrevention of pollution by             
SEWAGE from shipsNot Yet 
SignatoryNot Applicable Optional Optional 
Reg 5 :  1.) Subject to the provisions of paragrapgh 2 of 
this regulation, the discharge into the sea of any 
garbage is prohibited fixed or floating platforms, and 
from all other ships  when alongside or within 500 m of 
such platforms.                                                                    
2.) Food waste may be discharged into the sea from  
fixed or floating platforms located more than 12 NM 
from the nearest land and from all other ships  when 
alongside or within 500 m of such platforms, but only 
when the wastes have been passed through a 
comminuter or  grinder. Such comminuted or ground food 
waste shall be capable of pasing through  a screen with 
openings no gretaer than 25mm.
*Note : See also CVC Policy Letter 13-01 and 33 CFR 151.
01-Jan-10 MandatoryYES, but see 
"Special 
Requireme
nts"Reg 3.1 : Emissions from sea-bed mineral activities. 
Emissions directly arising from the exploration, 
exploitation and associated offshore processing of sea-
bed mineral resources are EXEMPT from the provisions of 
this Annex.                                                 Such emissions 
include: .1) emissions resulting from the incineration of 
substances that are soley and directly the result of 
exploration, exploitation and associated offshore 
processing; .2) the release of gases and volitile 
compounds entrained in drilling fliuds and cuttings; .3) 
emissions associated soley and directly with the 
treatment, handling or strgae of sea-bed minerals; and 
.4) emissions from marine diesel engines that are soley 
dedicated to the exploration, exploitation and associated 
offshore processing...                                                                                                           
Reg 3.2 : The requirements of regulation 18 shall not 
apply to the use of hydrocarbons that are produced and 
subsequently used on site as fuel. 
ECA Regs:             
(See CVC 
Policy 
Letter 12-
04)*Note:  Emissions arising from the operation of Dynamic 
Positioning equipment do not fall under the Regulation 
3.1 exemption, whether the MODU is transiting to 
location or is maintaining position on location during 
exploration, exploitation and associate offshore 
processing of sea-bed mineral resources.Mandatory YES
Reg 18.3 : Fuel Oil Quality                           
18.3.1.1 The fuel oil shall 
be blends of hydrocarbons 
derived from petroleum 
refining. This shall not 
preclude the 
incorportation of small 
amounts of additives 
intended to improve some 
aspect of performance;                       
VIPrevention of AIR                    
pollution  from shipsApplies to all ships.  400 GT 
and above & platform and 
drilling rigs engaged in 
voyages  to waters under the 
sovereignty or jurisdiction of 
other Parties.                              
(Except where expressly 
provided otherwise in regs 3, 
5, 6, 13, 15, & 18.)                                                                    
3: Exemptions;                                             
5: Surveys;                                                     
6: Certificates;                                           
13: Nitrogen Oxides (NO x);                     
15: Volatile organic 
compounds (VOCs); and                                                    
18: Fuel oil availability and 
qualityMARPOL Annex Applicability
Reg 10.4 :                                
(4)The Administration may 
waive the requirements for 
Garbage Record Books for: 
(.2) fixed or floating 
platforms.
VPrevention of pollution by             
GARBAGE from ships31-Dec-88Applies to all ships, 
regardless of tonnage.Requirements for fixed or floating platforms.
None.
None.
As of the creation of this job aid, the U.S. is NOT  signatory to this 
requirment.  Applicable U.S. regulations apply: 33 CFR 151, Subchapter "O".  
See also NVIC 01-09 for further information.MARPOL Annex I, Regulation 39 contains special requirements for fixed or 
floating platforms when engaged in the exploration, exploitation and 
associated offshore processing of sea-bed mineral resources.  However, 
ships when operating on the United States Outer Continental Shelf (U.S. 
OCS) are subject to the jurisdiction of the United States and therefore the 
requirements within 33 CFR § 151.25 to maintain an ORB apply, unless the 
fixed or floating drilling rig or other platform is operating in compliance with 
a valid National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. [See 
33 CFR§151.25(m)]                                                                                                                                
When a fixed or floating drilling rig or other platform departs the  U.S. OCS 
and is not operating in the navigable waters of the United States; the ship is 
no longer subject to the specific requirements in 33 CFR Subchapter O, but 
must now comply with MARPOL Annex I. 
 
############
1.  U.S. law accepts the International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) code as an alternative to 49 CFR, for  
     packaging and stowage, regardless of GT.  
2.  Adopted by U.S . and incorporated into 49 CFR 172 and 176.  
  
Diagram 2: MARPOL Annex V 
Type of Garbage Ships outside special areas Ships within special areasOffshore Platforms 
(more than 12 NM 
from land) and all 
ships within 500 M of 
such platforms
Food waste 
comminuted or 
groundDischarge permitted              
≥ 3 NM from the nearest 
land, en route and as far as 
practicbleDischarge permitted              
≥ 12 NM from the nearest 
land, en route and as far 
as practicbleDischarge Permitted
Food waste not 
comminuted or 
groundDischarge permitted              
≥ 12 NM from the nearest 
land, en route and as far as 
practicbleDischarge Prohibited Discharge Prohibited
Cargo residues not 
contained in wash 
waterDischarge Prohibited Discharge Prohibited
Cargo residues 
contained in wash 
waterDischarge permitted              
≥ 12 NM from the nearest 
land, en route and as far 
as practicbleDischarge Prohibited
Cleaning agents and 
additives contained in 
cargo hold wash 
waterDischarge permitted              
≥ 12 NM from the nearest 
land, en route and as far 
as practicbleDischarge Prohibited
Cleaning agents and 
additives  in deck and 
extrenal surfaces 
wash waterDischarge Permitted Discharge Prohibited
Carcasses of animals 
carried onboard as 
cargo and which died 
during the voyageDischarge permitted              
as far from the nearest land 
as possible and en route Discharge Prohibited Discharge Prohibited
All other garbage 
including plastics, 
sythetic ropes, fishing 
gear, plastioc garbage 
bags, incinerator 
ashes, clinkers, 
cooking oil, floating 
dunnage, lining and 
packing materials, 
paper, rags, glass, Discharge Prohibited Discharge Prohibited Discharge ProhibitedMARPOL Annex V
Discharge PermittedDischarge permitted              
≥ 12 NM from the nearest 
land, en route and as far as 
practicble
Mixed garbageWhen garbage is mixed with or contaminated by other substances prohibited 
from dischrage or having different discharge requirments, the more stringent 
requirments shall apply. 
  
  
 
O. TRAINING WITH THE BUREAU OF SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ENFORCEMENT  
 
The Coast Guard and the BSEE have formed a partnership to enhance interagency cross -
familiarization training.  
 
The Coast Guard is responsible for inspections of the hull structure, electrical system safety, lifesaving and fire fighting systems and equipment, and for verifying the unit’s crew is capable of conducting satisfactory emergency drills on MODUs and floa ting OCS Facilities operating on 
the U.S. OCS.  
 BSEE regulates the sub platform drilling and production systems, exploration drilling, well work over, and well servicing operations for these OCS units, as well as for the OCS fixed platforms.  The critical interface between subsea and surface operations necessitates coordination and collaboration between the two agencies and is the thrust of this initiative.  
 Field commanders should prioritize engagements with their respective BSEE OCS inspection offices to increase opportunities to accompany each other on OCS inspections. Optimal interactions should consist of optimizing cross training at the BSEE training center and inspection ride alongs, as operations and funding permit. The goal is not to conduct joint inspections, but rather for each agency to have opportunities to observe one another’s 
inspections. Participants should work to identify over -lapping inspection areas and gaps as well 
as build local partnerships. Over time, the coordination should evolve in ways to maximize the benefits of the partnership.  The goal of this effort is to institute an environment of increased interagency cooperation and knowledge with respect to offshore drilling and production safety as well as inspection 
processes.  
 
############
Coast Gu ard-BSEE coordination at the headquarters level is ongoing and is centered on working 
groups focused on updating interagency agreements and cross training. Engagement and 
coordination at the field level will further strengthen our partnerships and increase  the level of 
oversight on the OCS, resulting in a safer environment for maritime vessels and personnel.  
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
A. Existing  Versus New U.S. Flagged  MODUs      G2-4 
 1.  Existing          G2-4 
 2.  New           G2-4 
 B. Existing  MODU s         G2-4 
 
C. New  MODUs           G2-4 
 
D. COI Amendments          G2-5 
 
E. SOLAS and IMO MODU Code Procedures      G2-5 
1. SOLAS          G2-5 
2. Written Requests         G2-6 
 
F. Laid -Up MODUs          G2-7 
1. Notification          G2-7 
2. COI Status          G2-7 
3. Reduced Maintenance C rew, Certified MODU     G2-8 
4. Reduced Maintenance C rew, Surrendered or E xpired COI    G2-8 
5. Reactivation          G2-8 
6. No Extensions          G2-8 
 G. Class Society Exams          G2-9 
 1. NVIC 10 -82 Ch. 2        G2-9 
 2. Acceptance of ABS/Recognized Organization (RO) inspections   G2-9 
 H. Reflagging and Certifi cation of Existing Foreign MODU s   G2-10 
 I. Alternate Compliance Program ( ACP )       G2-10 
 
J. Streamlined  Inspection Program (SIP)       G2-10 
 
K. Conversion of a Self -Elevating MODU to a Fixed Production Facility   G2-10 
1. Option 1 -  Surrendered COI        G2-11 
2. Option 2 -  Unit R e-Certificated U nder 46 CFR Subchapter I   G2-12                      
3. Option 3 -  Status  Unchanged       G2-13 
 L. Conversion of a MODU to Fixed Entertainment Facility     G2-13 
  
M. Review of MODU Operating Manuals       G2-14 
1. Marine Safety Center (MSC)        G2-14 
2.  OCMI           G2-14 
3. Stability Letter         G2-14  
4. Operations Manual         G2-14 
 N. Review of Emergency Evacuation Plans (EEP s)      G2-15 
 O. Electrical Installations  on MODUs        G2-15 
 P. Navigation Lighting         G2-15 
 Q. Acceptance of Temporary Industrial Equipment Installed on   G2-15 
U.S. Flag MODUs Operating in Foreign Waters       
1. Discussion          G2-16 
2. Coastal S tate R equirements        G2-16 
 R. Single Voyage Load Line Authorizations        G2-17 
1. Applicability          G2-17 
2. Exceptional Circumstances       G2-17 
3. Load Line Author izations       G2-18a 
 S. Lifesaving Equipment         G2-19 
1. Excess C apacity of L ifeboats        G2-19 
2. IMO MODU Code Compliance       G2-19 
3. Throw -over liferafts         G2-20 
      
T. MODU Drydocking Interval and Requests for Extension    G2-20 
1. Drydock Intervals         G2-20 
2. Extensions          G2-20 
 U. Raw Water Towers         G2-21 
 V. Underwater Inspec tion in Lieu of Drydocking (UWILD)     G2-21 
1. Discussion          G2-21 
2. Approval          G2-22 
3. Calibrate NDT          G2-23 
4. Post-inspection actions        G2-23 
5. Liveboating          G2-24 
6. Approval A uthority for Plans       G2-24 
7. Internal Inspection of MODU Spud C ans     G2-24 
 W. Special Exam in Lieu of Drydocking (SEILOD)     G2-25 
 
X. Commercial Diving          G2-25 
  
 
 
 
A. EXISTING VERSUS NEW U.S.  FLAG GED  MODU S 
 
 
1. Existing  
 
U.S. units built , under construction or contracted for before April 5, 1982, are considered 
existing , and are regulated to the  design requirements applicable to the unit on April 4, 1982, 
until the unit is rebuilt.  
 
 
2.  New 
 A new  U.S.  flag MODU is one that was built, constructed, or contracted for , on or after  April 
5, 1982.  
 
 B. E
XISTING MODU S 
 
Existing  U.S. flag MODUs are subject to the requirements of NVIC 4 -78 , SOLAS 74/78, if 
propelled by mechanical means, and 33 CFR Subchapter N, if operating on the U.S. OCS.  
 
############
NVIC 4 -78, Change 1, was developed to elaborate on the grandfather provisions of MODU 
regulations for the then estimated 150 existing, oceangoing U.S. flag MODUs. The standard that 
this NVIC applied to existing units was less stringent than that applied to new units . 
 The NVIC did include a stipulation that certain equipment must be replaced t o the standards 
prescribed in 46 CFR Subchapter I -A once the existing equipment is considered no longer 
serviceable.  
 The grandfather provisions of NVIC 4 -78 are no longer available to any MODU seeking its 
initial COI.  
 
 C. N
EW MODU S 
 
New U.S. flag MODUs are inspected and certificated under the provisions of 46 CFR Subchapter 
I-A, SOLAS 74/78 ( if propelled by mechanical means and certificated for international service ), 
and 33 CFR Subchapter N, if operating on the U.S. OCS.  
 Note:  Any references to IMO MODU Code are the 1979 Code unless otherwise noted.  
  
U.S. flag MODUs operating on the U.S. OCS are also required to have annual on- site 
inspections, in accordance with 46 CFR subpart B. Unless in a laid -up status, these vessels must 
maintain compliance with their COI s regardless of location or of being in  the floating or bottom 
bearing mode. 
 
 
D. COI  AMENDMENTS  
 
An amended COI may be issued to an operator at the completion of an inspection if minor items 
are being changed on the vessel. This includes changes to the owner or operators address or 
name, next or last inspection dates for hull, cargo tank internal or internal structural 
examinations; or next or last inspection dates for boilers , steam piping, pressure vessels, tail shaft 
or lifesaving equipment.   An Amended COI must be reprinted/re -issued if changes are made to the vessels manning; the 
vessels operating details change in M ISLE; the firefighting or lifesaving equipment required 
onboard changes; or the cargo authority or conditions of carriage change.  
 An amended COI s hall be re -issued  after In S ervice I nspection P lan (ISIP ) inspections , hull, 
cargo tank internal or internal structural exams have been  completed  and the next or last 
inspection dates have changed.  
 The following statement shall be included at the end of each certificate amendment:  
 
“This/These amendment (s) shall automatically appear on the next COI that is issued for 
the vessel.  Please attach this form to the current COI for reference by any concerned parties.”
 
 All changes, regardless if  a COI is amended or no t, shall be entered into MISLE.  
 
 
E. SOLAS  AND IMO  MODU  CODE PROCEDURES  
 
 
1. SOLAS  
 
U.S. flag MODUs of 500 or more GT , propelled by mechanical means and engaged in 
international voyages, are subject to the requirements of SOLAS 74/78.  
 
U.S. flag MODUs propelled by mechanical means of 500 GT or more, engaged in international voyages, will  depart the U. S. with a valid COI and  have all applicable 
SOLAS cer tificate s, which may include an  IMO MODU Code  Safety Certificate .
 There is a large number of MODUs not subject to SOLAS that may be eligible to receive 
IMO MODU Code Safety Certificates.  These include jack -ups and units  not propelled by 
mechanical means. Currently, a unit which complies with Subchapter I -A does not 
necessarily comply with the IMO MODU Code. 
 
############
 
2. Written R equest s 
  
Owners or operators of U.S. flag MODUs who desire an inspection for compliance with the 
IMO MODU Code  should request this service from an authorized Classification Society.  
Specifics regarding authorizations can be found in 46 CFR Part 8.   
 
a. Builders  and owners of new MODUs should specify, at the time of plan review, 
whether or not they desire an IMO MODU Code Safety Certificate.  
 
b. IMO MODU Code inspections are normally conducted in conjunction with 
inspections for certification.  
 
c. When conflicts exist between the IMO  MODU Code and the provisions of 46 CFR 
Subchapter I -A, the owner may request an exemption or equivalency under 46 CFR 
108.105 as appropriate.  
 
d. Written requests for exemptions and equivalencies must be forwarded to 
Commandant ( CG-CVC) for action.  
 
(1) The owner must provide s ufficient justification  in order for the request to be given 
consideration.  
 (2) OCMI should endorse  all requests for exemptions or  equivalencies a s requested  
prior to submitting to Commandant . 
 
(3) Once exemptions or equivalencies have been approved by the Commandant, the 
IMO will be advised in accordance with the IMO MODU Code. Exemptions must 
be listed on the IMO MODU Code Safety Certificate.  
 (4) Deviations from the IMO MODU code should be discouraged. 
 (5) Upon satisfactory completion of the inspection, an IMO MODU Code Safety Certificate  will be issued by a Class Society authorized to do so in accordance 
with 46 CFR 8.320.  Typically the expiration date of the MODU Code Safety Certificate will align with th e expiration of the COI.   When issued to a MODU, 
propelled by mechanical means, it is considered a substitute for the SOLAS Safety Equipment Certificate and Safety Construction Certificate.  
 F. LAID-UP MODU S 
 
MODUs are often laid -up in coastal areas for extended periods of time , pending drilling 
contracts. The following guidelines are to be followed when a MODU is placed in la id-up status.  
 
 
1. Notification  
 
The owners of the MODU should notify the OCMI in whose zone the MODU is to be laid up. A stacking plan should be submitted and reviewed by the OCMI. As a minimum, the stacking plan should contain the following information:  
 
a. Location.  
 b. Crew onboard, if any. 
 c. Tank levels . 
 
d. Anchor arrangements . 
 
e. Communications . 
 
f. Maintenance of f irefighting/ lifesaving equipment . 
 
g. Means to evacuate personnel in case of emergency.  
 
h. Emergency response procedures.  
 
 
2. COI S tatus  
 
U.S. flag MODUs may be laid -up offshore or in protected waters. It is not required that an 
owner  or operator surre nder or deposit the unit's COI.  
 
a. All units laid -up in U.S. waters must meet the lighting and sound signal requirements 
of 33 CFR Part 67, or, when laid -up overseas, the 72 International Regulations for 
Preventing Collisions at Sea ( COLREGS ) or rules of the Coastal state  government 
exercising jurisdiction over the waters where the rig is to be stacked.  
 
b. When an owner  or operator advises the cognizant OCMI that a MODU is to be laid -
up in U.S. waters, the COTP must determine that the unit is not obstructing any 
designate d navigation lanes or channels.  
 c. Additionally, the D istrict navigation office must be notified for the purpose of 
publishing a local notice to m ariners.  
 
############
 
3. Reduced M aintenance Crew, Certificated  MODU  
 
When a reduced maintenance crew will be aboard a certificated MODU, the OCMI may 
amend the COI to permit a reduction in required crew. Lifeboatmen must be provided in 
accordance with 46 CFR 109.323. 
 
 
4. Reduced M aintenance Crew, Surrendered or Expired COI  
 a. When a reduced maintenance crew will be aboard a MODU with a surrendered or expired COI, the owner/operator must agree , in writing, to maintain the lifesaving, 
fire fighting, communications and other equipment determined necessary by the 
cognizant  OCMI, to ensure the safety of personnel.  
 
b. The owner must provide further written assurance to the OCMI that the unit will be 
manned with a sufficient number of persons capable of maintaining the unit in a safe 
condition under all circumstances, particu larly if th e unit is in the floating mode. 
 
c. Failure to abide by this agreement may be subject  to penalties under 46 U .S.C § 2302  
 
 
5. Reactivation  
 
Prior to placing a stacked MODU back into service, all outstanding deficiencies and worklist 
items should be completed  to the satisfaction of the OCMI . 
 
a. When a COI is reissued, the MODU must meet the same inspection requirements that were imposed when it was last inspected ; any grandfather provisions previously 
afforded the MODU will remain intact. However, the MODU must meet any newly 
promulgated requirements applicable to existing MODUs  that would have applied to 
the MODU had it remained in continuous service. 
 b. Vessels that surrendered their COIs will be required to complete an inspection for 
certification, including a drydocking or special underwater examination, if due. 
 
 
6. No E xtensions  
 
When COIs are not surrendered, owners  or operators should be advised that when the 
MODU is returned to service NO additional extensions of drydock requirements will be  
 granted other than what is permitted under current regulations. 
 
 
G. CLASS SOCIETY EXAMS  
 
 1. NVIC 10 -82 Ch. 2  
 
 NVIC 10 -82 Ch.2 sets forth procedures established by a  MOU between the Coast Guard 
and The American Bureau of Shipping ( ABS ). The Coast Guard will accept ABS  plan 
review and i nspection for new construction or major modifications  of U.S. Flag vessels, 
which include s MODUs.  
 
a. This requirement is only applicable to vessels classed by ABS. Plan review and 
inspections performed by ABS on behalf of the Coast Guard will replace those 
actions by the Coast Guard. Inspections for cause are permitted and oversight 
inspections shall be carried out.  Inspections for cause are conducted when the OCMI 
becomes aware of any circumstance which indicates active Coast Guard inspection of 
items falling under the provisions of NVIC 10 -82 is required , in the interest of safety.  
 
b.  MODUs inspected under NVIC 10 -82, require internal structural exams. Spud can 
and mat tank internal structural examinations are some of the most hazardous 
activities conducted due to the decay of residual organic matter which has the potential to create oxygen deficient atmospheres or toxic hydrogen sulfide gases.  
 
 
2. Acceptance of  ABS/ Recognized Organization (RO) inspections  
 
############
OCMI’s are also authorized to accept ABS and other recognized organization (RO) inspections of spud cans and mat tanks during special exams in lieu of drydocking (SEILOD) for independent leg and mat supported jack up mobile offshore drilling units.  
 
a. Inspectors should continue to examine the external surface of the spud cans and mat tanks, specifically in high stress areas around leg  joint connections.  
 b. When  an external exam or class society internal inspection warrants  an entry by a 
Coast Guard Inspector , the space shall be considered a confined space and current 
safety requirements by a Certified Marine Chemist  shall be followed prior to entry.  
 H. REFLAGGING AND CERTIFICATION OF EXISTING FOREIGN MODU S 
 
NVIC 10 -81 Ch. 1 was  developed to allow certain categories of existing foreign flag vessels to 
be brought under U.S. flag in a manner consistent with the principles and levels of safety in current Coa st Guard regulations or, in some cases, to the Coast Guard standards in effect at the 
time of the vessel's construction.  
 
 
I. ALTERNATE COMPLIANCE PROGRAM (ACP ) 
 
The Alternate Compliance Program (ACP) is a voluntary alternative process for a U. S. 
documented vessel to obtain a Coast Guard Certificate of Inspection (COI) by comply ing with 
the standar ds of an author ized classification society, International Conventions and a U.S. 
Supplement  in lieu of the C ode of Federal Regulations .  It provides for vessel inspections using 
inspectors employed by a recognized classification society. It is also an alternative to complying with the vessel inspe ction regulat ions in Title 46 Code of Feder al Regulations. It is available 
only to vessels capable of operating on international voyages and classed through a recognized 
classification society. NVIC 02 -95 Ch. 2, discusses the Alternative Compliance Program which 
is currently available to MODUs and other types of vessels (see 46 CFR 8).  
 
 
J. STREAMLINED INSPECTION PROGRAM (SIP)  
 
The Streamlined Inspection Program (SIP) is a voluntary alternate method of inspecting 
documented or registered U.S. flag vessels to ensure regulatory compliance. The goal of the SIP is to keep the participants in continual compliance rather than cyclical peaks as associated with traditional annual inspections. NVIC 02 -99 Part 1 and NVIC 02 -99 Part 2 provide guidanc e on 
the implementation and enforcement of the SIP as promulgated in 46 CFR Part 8.  Instead of the traditional Coast Guard inspection by a marine inspector, the SIP allows onboard and shore side vessel operating personnel to conduct the majority of the inspections required by the CFR’s and to have the adequacy of these inspections verified by the Coast Guard on a regular basis (see 46 CFR part 8) . 
 
 K. C
ONVERSION OF A SELF-ELEVATING MODU  TO A FIXED PRODUCTION FACILITY  
 Owners of self -elevating MODUs that w ill be converted into production facilities  may utilize 
one of the three  options discussed below with respect to cert ification of the proposed unit.  
 In each case , the owner shall  notify the cognizant OCMI, in writing, of their intention. After 
reviewing a proposal, the OCMI shall notify the owner of what plan review and inspection 
actions are necessary.  
 Units originally certificated under NVIC 4 -78 Ch. 1 that are converted into fixed OCS facilities 
or are re -certificated under 46 CFR Subchapter I will no t be able to retain the  MODU 
grandfather status allowed under the NVIC.  
 
############
Any systems which fall under Coast Guard jurisdiction as outlined in the Coast Guard and B SSE, 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) , signed on 27 Nov 2012, will be the subject of Coast 
Guard review and approval  (On October 1, 2011, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, 
Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE), formerly the Minerals Management Service (MMS), was replaced by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management ( BOEM) and the Bureau of Safety 
and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) as part of a major reorganization.  
Once the conversion is approved, it will be subject to the requirements of  33 CFR Parts 140- 147. 
If the facility received a Coast Guard inspection within 6 months of the conversion, it will not 
have to undergo an initial inspection and the owner/operat or must complete the self -inspection at 
the next annual inspection date.  
 
 
1. Option 1 -  Surrendered COI  
 
A self -elevating unit that is converted in to a production facility and is no longer capable of 
engaging in drilling, as a result of removal of all or part of its drilling equipment  may be 
considered a fixed OCS facility by th e Coast Guard.  
 
a. Fixed OCS Facility . In order to be considered a fixed OCS facility, the unit's COI and 
Certificate of Documentation (COD) must be surrendered  and the jacking gear must 
be disabled so that the unit cannot be easily lowered to the water . In addition, two  of 
the following three  items must be removed from the unit: 1.) the derrick, 2.) mud 
pumps, or 3.) rotary . Facilities will be subject to the requirements of 33 CFR 
Subchapter N pertaining to fixed OCS facilities, as appropriate.  
 b. Such units will not be subject to inspection as a MODU. Additionally, the facility will be subject to BSEE requirements.  
 c. Moving a Fixed OCS Facility. A  unit that surrenders its COI may be moved after a 
period of time to another location without losing its status as a fixed OCS production facility. However, if the unit must be refloated in order to be moved to a new location, it must undergo an inspection by the cognizant OCMI for change of employment. 
 
(1) Such units must  comply with the 46 CFR Subchapt er I inspection requirements. 
As part of this inspection, the unit must undergo a drydock or special underwater 
examination to ensure the hull is watertight and sound, unless evidence is presented of a satisfactory drydock or special exam within the past 3 years.  
 (2) The unit will be required to comply with the appropriate load line  regulations. 
 
(3) A Coast Guard review of the unit's plans and stability may also be required. 
 (4) Upon completion of a satisfactory inspection, the unit should be issued a limited 
or short -term certificate in acco rdance with 46 CFR 91.01- 10(c).  
 (5) Upon completion of the move and once the unit is elevated on its new location, 
the unit will be required to disable its jacking gear t o the satisfaction of the 
OCMI.  
 
############
(6) If the OCMI determines that the normal operation of the unit will require it to be 
frequently refloated, then the unit will not be eligible for consideration as a fixed 
OCS facility. Such units will be required to remain vessels and be subject to the 
vessel inspe ction laws. If the unit changes its employment and becomes a fixed 
OCS  facility, it cannot retain any of the grandfather status allowed in NVIC 4 -78 
Ch. 1, titled Inspection and Certification of Existing Mobile Offshore Drilling 
Units.  
 
 
2. Option 2 -  Unit Re -Certificated U nder 46 CFR Subchapter I  
 
A self -elevating unit that is converted to a production facility and is no longer capable of 
engaging in drilling, as a result of removal of all or part of its drilling equipment, may be re-
certificated as a miscellaneous self -elevating vessel under 46 CFR Subchapter I . 
 This option is appropriate if the owner does not want to relinquish the vessel's COI or if the 
MODU requires frequent relocating , as mentioned in Option 1. 
 
a. The unit must undergo periodic inspections as required by 46 CFR Subchapter I, 
including hull examinations. 
 b. The unit must also  meet certain requirements of 46 CFR Subchapter I -A. These items 
include design and operation of cranes, stability, hazardous are as, lifesaving 
equipment, firefighting  equipment , and hel icopter decks.  
 c. Where systems serve both production and ship's service, an interface point must be identified during review to establish jurisdiction between the Coast Guard and B SEE.  
 d. A unit  operating under this option loses its grandfather status allowed in NVIC 4 -78 
Ch. 1. 
 
e. If the unit  stores oil in bulk it is considered a tank vessel and must comply with 46  
      CFR Subchapter D, Tank Vessels, and 33 CFR Part 157, Rules for the Protection of 
the Marine Environment Relating to Tank Vessels Carrying Oil in Bulk.  
 
f. When a MODU undergoes such a change, a n inspection note entry must be made in 
MISLE identifying the date of change and whether or not the tank vessels rules apply.  
 
 
3. Option 3 -  Status U nchanged 
 
Self-elevating units that are converted in to production facilities but retain their drilling 
equipment on board and remain capable of engaging in drilling will remain certificated as MODUs . 
 
a. These units  are allowed to maintain their grandfather status as found in NVIC 4 -78 
Ch. 1. 
 b. Such units must continue to meet all requirements of 46 CFR Subchapter I -A. 
 c Some production systems on these units will also be subject to review by the Coast Guard when they are common with a ship's service system. In these systems, an interface point must be established during review in order to delineate jurisdiction.  
 d. As in Option 2, any unit that is used for storing oil in bulk is considered a tank vessel  
and must comply with 46 CFR Subchapter D, Tank Vessels and 33 CFR Part 157, 
Rules for the Protection of the Marine Environment Relating to Tank Vessels Carrying Oil in Bulk. 
 
############
 
L. CONVERSION OF A MODU  TO FIXED ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY  
 
A submersible or self -elevating MODU that is converted to a fixed entertainment facility (as 
defined in 33 CFR 101.105: Public Access Facility)  is subject to the following:  
 
The unit will no longer be considered a vessel for the purposes of vessel inspection if  it is 
converted in such a manner as to be incapable of being used as a means of water transportation in any manner and it is substantially permanently moored or fixed.  A converted MODU used for the purpose of entertainment will no longer be considered as engaging in the development, exploitation, exploration or production of oil or mineral resources on the U.S. OCS. Once the conversion is completed, such a unit will not be subject to the 
provisions of 33 CFR Subchapter  N, but must continue to comply with 33 CFR Subchapter O 
(Pollution) and the provisions of 33 CFR Subchapter C (Aids to Navigation).  Any floating dock intended to be used as a boarding platform for the facility will be considered a 
 permanently moored vessel , not subject to vessel inspection laws, provided it is substantially 
moored such that it cannot be moved without special effort. Specifications and detailed drawings 
of the floating platform and its associated mooring systems must be  submitted to the cognizant 
OCMI for review and final determination of its status for inspection purposes.  
 
A MODU that is converted to a wind farm platform will no longer be under Coast Guard 
jurisdiction as an  inspected vessel or facility. A MOU with Bureau of Ocean Energy 
Management  (BOEM ) is being promulgated to clarify jurisdictional boundaries pertaining to 
these non- OCS Activity structures.  
 
 
M. REVIEW OF MODU  OPERATING MANUALS  
 
Review and approval of the new and existing MODU operating manuals should be accomplished 
through the following procedures.  
 
 
1. Marine Safety Center (MSC)   
  
The Marine Safety Center (MSC) will review manuals of existing units for compliance with 
46 CFR 109.121( b)(1), (3)- (7), (9) -(18) and, if acceptable, forward the manual , the results of 
the review, and an undate d stability letter to the OCMI.  
 
 
2. OCMI  
 
The OCMI will then review the remaining sections of the manual, accepting MSC's review for compliance with the aforementioned sections as appropriate, and if satisfied, approve the manual, as well as date and issue the stability letter.  
 
 
3. Stability Letter  
 
After issu ing the stability later, the OCMI will forward a copy of both the stability letter and 
the letter approving the manual to the MSC. If , during the life of the unit, the OCMI becomes 
aware of changes to the manual or unit which would affect stability or conditions under which the stability letter wa s developed, MSC should be notified.  
 
 
4. Operations Manual  
 
The MSC  will review the entire operating m anual in the case of new units.   
  
 
N. REVIEW OF EMERGENCY EVACUATION PLANS  (EEP S) 
 
To improve efficiency and consistency throughout the Coast Guard, OCMI’s are encouraged to 
exercise their authority under  33 CFR Subchapter 140.15(a)  and permit alternate procedures to 
those specified in 33 CFR Subchapter  N for submission and approval of EEPs under 33 CFR 
146.140 and 146.210. Further, OCMIs may opt to no longer require review and approval of EEPs that have been submitted due to minor changes in the plan. All EEPs will continue to be checked 
in the normal c ourse of platform and MODU inspections, and deficiencies will be reported as 
Vessel/Facility Inspection Requirements, Form CG -835, items.  Regional EEPs may also be 
submitted for multiple OCS facilities operated by the same company but in different geographic areas, as long as the EEP is submitted to each of the cognizant  OCMIs for review and approval.  
 
############
 
O. ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS ON MODU S 
 
NVIC 2 -89 should be used as a guide for elect rical installations on MODUs. The NVIC was 
prepared to provide industry with information on regulatory intent , background, and common 
practices which have been found to provide a level of safety  equivalent to that provided for by 
specific regulations. Enclosure (1) to NVIC 2 -89 is a guide to Coast Guard Electr ical 
Engineering Regulations, 46 CFR 110 -  113, and provides details on acceptable methods of 
complying with the regulations as well as other important information related to electrical 
installations.  
 
 
P.  NAVIGATION LIGHTING  
 
MODUs are required to comply  with the  Navigation Rules, International -Inland, COMDTINST 
M16672.2C (series) . Per Navigation Rule 3 and as defined in 33 CFR 140.10, MODUs are 
vessels and shall abide by the Navigation Rules and properly display navigation lights and 
shapes (i.e. , Rules 22, 23(a), 27(d), etc.). MODUs, particularly when drilling, are also subject to 
other regulations denoted in Title 33 CFR, parts 67 and 140- 147 (Subchapter N).  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Q. ACCEPTANCE OF TEMPORARY INDUSTR IAL EQUIPMENT INSTALLED ON U.S.  FLAG 
MODU S OPERATING IN  FOREIGN WATERS  
 
 Note:  A vessel being propelled by a dynamic positioning system (e.g. , MODU)  may be  
considere d underway even when hovering on location, but, may also be "restricted in her 
ability to maneuver" as defined by Navigation Rule 3 (International -Inland) .  
 1. Discussion  
 
U.S. flag MODUs operating in foreign waters are sometimes subject to coastal state 
requirements and equipment availability problems unique to their location. 
 
a. Subcontractor services, including well logging, cementing, casing perforation, etc., 
often require temporary installations. These installations may include electrical 
equipment, pressure vessels, packaged boilers, etc.  
 b. Temporary industrial installation s provided by local contractors sometimes meet local 
equipment listing (certification) or design code requirements. From a practical 
standpoint, it has become necessary to acknowledge coastal state requirements and 
logistical problems and permit temporary installations that are approved by the 
coastal state, when it is safe to do so.  
 
c. The goal of this policy is to fulfill the safety principals and features embodied in U.S. regulations , while recognizing the operational constraints in some geographical ar eas. 
 
 
2. Coastal S tate R equirements  
 
Where temporary equipment or systems are installed, those items listed by an independent laboratory or constructed to a recognized design standard may be permitted by the OCMI in whos e zone the vessel is operating.  
 
a. In making a decision to permit temporary installations, a review of records relating to design, testing, and inspection of equipment such as boilers and pressure vessels shall 
be conducted by the Coast Guard. The frequency and scope of recorded inspections should approximate U.S. regulations. 
 b. Upon return to U.S. waters and prior to engaging in OCS activities, MODUs must fully comply with equipment listing requirements in U.S. regulations.  
  
R. SINGLE VOYAGE LOAD LINE AUTHORI ZATIONS  
 
 
1. Applicability  
 
46 CFR 42.03- 30 (f)  provides that a vessel  that does not usually engage on domestic 
voyages by sea but that, in exceptional circumstances, is required to undertake a singl e 
voyage between two specific ports is:  
 
############
a. Subject to 46 U.S.C. 5101 – 5116 and the applicable regulations of Subchapter  E; and  
 b. issued a single voyage load line authorization by the Commandant that states the 
conditions under which the voyage may be made and any additional safety measures 
for a single voyage. 
 
 
2. Exceptional Circumstances 
 
a. Examples of “exceptional circumstances” as it pertains to the issuance of single 
voyage load line authorizations.  
 
(1) Where the owner changes the location of his or her business operations, and desires merely to move  his or her craft to the new base of operations and not in 
fulfillment of any contract;  
 (2) Where the owner sells his or her business or one of his or her vessels to another and it is necessary to move the vessel or vessels to the location specified by th e 
new owner;  
 (3) Where a voyage is necessary to deliver a new vessel to its owner at a port other than where the craft was constructed;  
 (4) Where a voyage is made to another port for the purpose of making repairs or alterations; and  
 (5) Where a vessel t hat is not otherwise subject to  the loadline provision (because it 
operates exclusively inside the Boundary Line ) must  make a single transit outside 
the Boundary Line to reach a new location for operations exclusively inside the Boundary Line. 
 b. The above clarification of “exceptional circumstances” does not change the 
applicability of load line regulations for types of vessels that are currently exempt 
from such requirements (such as small passenger vessel on a domestic voyage).  
 c. A table  of requir ed load lines for U.S. vessels can be found as Figure 1 -1 on page 1- 3 
in the CG- ENG -2 (formerly CG -5212)  Load Line Policy Notes. T his document can 
be located online at: http://www.uscg.mil/hq/cg5/cg5212/docs/LLPN.pdf . It provides 
appropriate load line type s for international voyages, domestic voyages and other 
types of voyages and for certain routes encompassed by those voyages.  
 d. For further details on the “ exceptional  circumstances” as it pertains to the issuance 
single voyage load line authorizations a nd voyage requirements for seagoing barges 
and other vessels, see CG- 543 Policy Letter 10- 01.  
 
Vessel 
Service  
(see note 1.)  Vessel Particulars  COI 
needed/cite  Load Line 
needed/ 
cite Draft/ Voyage 
Requirements 
needed/ cite  
Seagoing 
motor vessel  
(See note 2.) Vsl 300 grt or more; 79’ or 
more.  YES  
46 U .S.C 
3301  YES  
46 U.S.C  
5102  N/A 
(Issued Load Line)  
motor vessel  
(See note 3.)  Vsl 300 grt or more; 79’ or 
more; COE (part of trip is 
beyond Boundary Line)  YES  
46 U.S.C  
3301 N/A 
46 U.S.C  
5102 YES  
MSM Vol. IV, 
pages 6 -92 & 6- 94 
motor vessel  
(See note 3.)  Vsl less than 300 grt but 
greater than 150 grt or 79’ or more; COE (part of trip is 
Beyond Line).  N/A 
46 U.S.C  
3301 N/A 
46 U.S.C  
5102 YES  
MSM Vol. IV, pgs 
6-92 & 6- 94 
motor vessel  
 Vsl less than 150 grt or less 
than 79’; COE (part of trip 
beyond Boundary Line).  N/A 
46 U.S.C  
3301 N/A 
46 U.S.C  
5102 N/A  
(Not issued load 
line) 
Notes:  
1. All vessels in this table are commercial vessels conducting domestic voyages.  
2. “Seagoing” means voyages beyond the boundary line in the course of normal employment.  
3. “Non -seagoing” means the vessel cannot operate beyond the Boundary Line w/out CG Authorization.  
4. Acceptable types of load lines for a given voyage can be found in Figure 1-1 on page 1-3 in CG 5212’s  
Load Line Policy Notes.  
 
############
 
3. Load Line Authorization  
 
As noted in M arine S afety M anual  Volume IV - Technical, COMDTINST M16000.9 
(series), Chapter 6.F.3.a; assigning authority for load lines on U.S Vessels has been granted to the American Bureau of Shipping (ABS), or other recognized classification society as approved by Commandant.  
a. International L oad Line (Single Voyage) Exemption Certificates and Coastwise 
Single Voyage Load Line Authorization Letters. The cognizant OCMI may issue two different but distinct load line authorizations: the International Load Line 
(Single Voyage) Exemption Certificate  and the Coastwise Single Voyage Load 
Line Authorization Letter.  See M arine S afety Manual  Volume IV - Technical, 
COMDTINST M16000.9 (series) , Chapter 6.F.3.c. for details on each type of 
certificate and the processes for application.  
 
b. Extensions of Load Line certificates and all other requests for Load Line 
exemptions. Approval of an extension for a Load Line Certificates (not to exceed 
150 days) originally issued by class (ABS), or requests for exemptions other than 
single voyage must be received in  writing from the owner/operator to 
Commandant (CG -CVC- 2).  The request should include the name of the unit, 
official number, and duration of request and description of why the unit should 
receive the extension or exemption certificate versus a permanent certificate.   
 
c. Load Line Certificate Forms. The forms of the various Load Line Certificates are specified in the regulation as follows:  
 
(1) International  Load Line Certificate (1966) : 46 CFR42.50- 5 
 (2) International  Load Line Exemption  Certificate : 46 CFR 42.07- 45(e)(f) and   
     (h)  
 (3) Load Line Certiifcate ( Form B ): 46 CFR42.50- 10(b)  
 (4) Coastwise  Load Line Certificate (Form C1) : 46 CFR 42.50- 15 
 (5) Loadline Certificate for a Special Service Coastwise or Inter- Island Voyage :  
     46 CFR 44.05- 35 
 (6) Subdivision Load Lines: 46 CFR 46.10- 30, Subdivision load lines are 
indicated by making specific entries on the appropriate load line certificate. There is no special form for subdivision load lines.  


G2 -18b  (7) Short Term Conditional Load Line : M arine S afety M anual  Volume II, 
COMDINST 16000.7 (series), Section E, Chapter 4.D, allows ABS to use 
certain non -exclusive surveyors to sign the annual endorsement or provide a 
provisional or short term conditional load line certificate on behalf of the 
Coast Guard. Requests to use a non -exclusive surveyor should be forwarded 
to COMDT (CG -CVC- 2) for approval. NOTE: Under this policy, it is ABS’s 
responsibility to establish and validate a potential non -exclusive surveyor.  
  
 
S. LIFESAVING EQUIPMENT  
 
 
1.  Excess Capacity of L ifeboats  
 
Lifeboat capacity in excess of that required by 46 CFR 108.503 may be substituted for life 
rafts subject to the following provisions:  
 
a. No single lifeboat or liferaft may  be credited with more than 100 percent of persons 
allowed on the MODU . 
 
b. Lifeboats must provide for at least 100 percent capacity . 
 c. Lifeboats and life rafts  combined must provide for at least 200 percent capacity . 
 d. Lifeboats and life rafts  must be arranged so that a limited area fire or other casualty 
does not immobilize lifeboats or liferafts accommodating more than 100 percent capacity.  
 
############
 
2. IMO MODU Code  Compliance  
 
The above policy satisfies the intent of 46 CFR 108, Subpart E, i.e., to require each MODU to have a total combined lifeboat  and liferaft capacity to accommodate 200 percent o f the 
persons allowed on board. 
 
a. MODUs equipped with lifeboats and liferafts in accordance with U.S. regulations 
may not necessarily be in compliance with the IMO MODU Code. Therefore, when 
certificating units for operation in other than domestic service, the operator should be 
cautioned that a COI does not certify com pliance with  the IMO MODU Code.  
 b. The IMO MODU Code requires certain survival craft be arranged for float free 
operation.  
 c. The IMO MODU Code does not specifically provide for substituting lifeboats for liferafts. When verifying compliance with the IMO MODU Code Certificate, 
additional lifeboats or liferafts may be necessary to meet the requirements of both 46 CFR Subchapter I -A (davit launch ca pability) and IMO (float free).  
 
(1) If davit launched liferafts are also arranged for float free operation and accommodat e 100 percent of the persons allowed on board, then they meet the 
requirements of both U.S. regulations and the IMO MODU Code. 
  
(2) An alternative approach may be installing lifeboats to accommodate 200 percent capacity (meeting 46 CFR 108.515 - with subst itution) and float -free, throw -over 
rafts for 100 percent capacity (meets IMO MODU Code  requirement for float -
free).  
 
 
3. Throw -over L iferafts  
 
Throw -over liferafts are only permitted on submersible MODUs. NVIC 4 -78 Ch. 1 permits 
submersible MODUs may substitute Coast Guard -approved throw -over inflatable liferafts 
and an approved rescue boat for the required davit launched lifeboats.  
 
 
T. MODU  DRYDOCKING INTERVAL AND REQUESTS FOR EXTENSION  
 
 
1. Drydock Intervals  
 
Under current Coast Guard regulations, a ll other class of vessels require the t wice in a five 
year interval for dry docking or special examination.  Coast Guard guidance allows MODUs 
the same option with  drydock examinations conducted in the presence of a Coast Guard 
inspector .  These may be conducted at least twice within any 5 -year period after issu ance of  a 
COI or COC  with no more than 3 years elapsing  between any two examinations.  
 
 
2. Extensions  
 
Requests for an extension of a drydock or special underwater survey on a MODU should be 
considered on a case by case basis using the following additional guidance. 
 a.  The beginning of the 5- year period is t he credit date of the previous hull exam. Every 
effort should be made to encourage owners and operators of MODUs to complete the next hull exam between the 2nd and 3rd year anniversary ( 1 year window) and in 
conjunction with a rig move, when both the upper hull and underwater portions of the exam can be conducted. Intervals between any two surveys should not exceed 36 
months.  (1) In cases where this is not practical, (independent leg jack- up, on location) the 
upper hull exam should be conducted and credit given, with a requirement to complete the underwater examination at the next rig move. Such a procedure should alleviate the need for hull exam extensions, even at the end of the 5-year 
period.  
 (2) Outstanding requirements must be closely monitored to e nsure they do not remain 
outstanding for excessive periods  (typically 90 days or more depending on 
requirement) . 
 
############
c. Near  the end of the 5- year interval, operators should be encouraged to complete the 
hull exam early, if necessary, so that it may be accomplished during a rig move, when 
both the upper hull and underwater portions of the exam can be completed. Such exams may be credited as of  the date the 5-year cycle would end even though 
conducted early.  
 
 
U. RAW WATER TOWERS   
 
The raw water tower  if utilized  is would be  the source of supply water for vital systems , 
including firewater and engine cooling, and should be given close scrutiny during drydock 
inspections or special underwater surveys in lieu of drydocking on all MODUs  that still use this 
system . 
 At this inspection , the tower should be raised and lowered to the extent necessary to allow a 
complete inspection to ensure its structural integrity. Particular attention should be paid to the rack to chord connections.  If the tower is of two piece construction with a flanged midsection, the area in way of the fl ange 
should be closely examined for fracturing.  
 
 
V. UNDERWATER INSPECTION IN LIEU OF DRYDOCKING (UWILD)   
 
 
1. Discussion  
 
Owners/operators have the option of alternating drydock exams with underwater surveys 
under the following regulation s: 46 CFR 31.10- 21(d)  (Subchapter “D” – Tank Vessels) , 
91.40- 3(d) (Subchapter “I” – Cargo and Misc Vessels)  and 189.40- 3(d) (Subchapter “N” – 
Oceanographic Research Vessels) . Underwater examinations in 46 CFR 107, for column-
stabilized and self -elevating MODUs is  also allowed. Vessels over 15 years old may be  
allowed to remain in the program provided the requirements in NVIC 1 -89 are met . 
 A UWILD is different from a Special Exam in Lieu of Drydocking ( SEILOD). A vessel 
enrolled in the UWILD program is permitted to conduct a UWILD in lieu of every other dry-dock. For example, a vessel would be required to drydock a vessel at year 2.5, 5, 7.5,10 and 12.5; they  would be permitted a UWILD at year 2.5, 7.5 and 12.5.  
 
Special Examinations in lieu of Drydock (SEILOD) exam s are alternatives to the traditional 
 drydock intervals and allow a vessel to conduct a SEILOD at EVERY dry- dock interval 
versus every other  as in the case of UWILD’s. See Part "X” of this Chapter for a description 
of the SEILOD Program.  
 
 
 
2. Approval  
 
Many factors are to be considered before approving UWILD  requests, including rig 
operations, weather, and diving conditions. NVIC 1 -89 offers guidance on the procedures for 
approval and conduct of an UWILD exam. The process for conducting a n UWILD should be 
in accordance with this NVIC.  
 
a. Prior to the UWILD , there should be a pre -inspection meeting between the Coast 
Guard and owner/operator of the MODU. The owner/operator must also submit an inspection plan to the OCMI for approval.  
 b. The owner/operator must provide the OCMI with a set(s) of plans detailing the 
MODUs hull design, showing all through hull fi ttings and original scantlings. 
 c. The following items should be discussed during the meeting. 
 
############
(1) A hull gauging strategy should be agreed upon, detailing the method to be employed and critical locations to be examined. 
 (2) The contract divers should be presented to the OCMI for approval. The divers should be experienced in conducting UWILDs. Any divers that have been 
certified by ABS will meet this requirement.  
 
(3) Agreement should be reached concerning which through hull fittings are to be opened for inspection. If a partial inspection of through hull fittings are opened for inspection, an exact listing must be made in the diary entry and an inspection note in MISLE must be made  detailing which valves were examined must be 
made.  
 
d. The m arine i nspector must carefully review the plans and video tapes of the previous 
exam (if available) prior to conducting the UWILD.  
 e. The MODU must be placed in the lightest working draft within acceptable stability 
limits. The area above the waterline will rec eive a traditional examination.  
 (1) Particular attention should be paid to high stress areas such as the joints of structural members.  
 (2) All internal compartments must be entered and visually examined. B efore anyone  
 enter s a confined space , the space must be certified gas free by an NFPA -certified 
Marine Chemist.  
 
(3) All through hull fittings and sea valves must be  given the same examination as 
during a regular drydock examination. 
 
f. The hull must be cleaned and free of marine growth. 
 g. The gauging of the hull may be internal or underwater. If acceptable to the OCMI, at every second examination, the owner may ha ve the examination conducted while the 
unit is at its working draft. This examination must be conducted as abov e with the 
following exceptions.  
 
(1) The hull gauging must , of necessity, be accomplished using underwater ultrasonic 
techniques.  
 (2) A representative number of welds in stress areas must be examined using 
underwater ultrasonic techniques acceptable to the OCMI. Records of indications, such as sketches of detected flaws, must be maintained in sufficient from to be 
used for comparative pur poses during subsequent inspections. 
 (3) Only the internal compartments which are accessible in the working condition will be entered and examined.  
 
 3. Calibrate NDT  
 
The Marine Inspector must be satisfied that the non - destructive testing equipment is 
properly calibrated prior to use. 
 
 
4. Post-Inspection A ctions  
 The owner/operator or private contractors must provide the Marine Inspector with the following:  
 
a. Copy of underwater hull survey video . 
 b. Copy of diver's r eport . 
 c. Copy of hull gauging r eport . 
 d. Copy of r esults of non- destructive t esting . 
  
5. Liveboating  
 
Underwater exams performed during rig movements may involve liveboating.  Liveboating 
means the support of a surfaced -supplied diver from a vessel underway without DP ability.  
(DP operations are described in Chapter 6 of this M anual.). When the rig owner or operator 
submits a request and plan for the underwater exam, they should be directed  to also request a 
variance for liveboating , should one be needed.  
 
############
a. See 46 CFR Part 197 f or a discussion of liveboating. 
 
b. All requests for a liveboating “ variance”,  or alternative to the regulations, must be 
forwarded to Commandant ( CG-CVC) for approval.  
 
 
6. Approval A uthority for P lans 
 a. Requests for approval of underwater  examination in lieu of drydocking for surface 
type units should be forwarded to Commandant  (CG- CVC),  via the District 
Commander, with the OCMI’s recommendation. If conceptual approval is granted by Commandant, the OCMI will review and approve the details of the plan using NVIC 12-69 and NVIC 1 -89 as a guide.  
 b. All underwater survey plans must specifically address methods of testing confined spaces for toxic vapors and oxygen content and rescue equipment/methods available for removing an unconscious person from a confined space. Normally, this requires some portable lifting equipment. 
 c. In all cases, the c lass s ociety should be contacted for concurrent approval and a class 
representative should be on hand to witness the UWILD examination. 
 
 
7. Internal I nspection of MODU Spud C ans 
 46 CFR 107.261 and 107.267 require dry docking or SEILOD for self elevating units. 
 
a. The MODU structural regulations in 46 CFR Part 108 recognize ABS Rules for Building & Classing Offshore Mobile Drilling Units, 1978.  
 b. Coast Guard Standard policy is to use the  ABS  "Survey after  Construction" rules and 
those for "SELOID" in evaluating and conducting SE ILOD inspe ctions.  
 c. For consistency purposes, OCMIs will not normally require internal examinati ons of 
spud cans until  the MODU s second special survey (10th year) and at least 5- year  
 intervals thereafter, in conjun ction with each special survey.  
 
d. The marine inspector must conduct external examinations of the MODU s spud cans 
in accordance with the regulations. Nothing in this section prohibit s the equipment 
listing (certification) or design code on a MODU  from requiring an earlier internal 
examination if conditions warrant further scrutiny.  
 
 W. S
PECIAL EXAM IN LIEU OF DRYDOCKING (SEILOD ) 
 
 
If a MODU is column -stabilized , self -elevating, or is a surface type, it may be specially 
examined in lieu of drydocking in accordance with 46 CFR  107.265 and .267, in the presen ce of 
a Coast Guard inspector.  
 Delegation of approval authority for SEILOD’s, permitted by 46 CFR  107.261, is extended to 
district (OCS ) offices. Commandant (CG -CVC) retains approval authority for surface type units 
only.   NVIC 12 -69 offers guidance on the procedures for approval and conduct ing a  SEILOD  exam.  
 
 
X. COMMERCIAL DIVING  
 
 
Commercial diving equipment and operations, including those conducted on USCG inspected vessels, platforms, MODUs, or foreign flag vessels engaged in OCS activities shall be in accordance with 46 CFR Part 197, Subpart B.  Commandant (CG- CVC) will coordinate with 
appropriate Coast Guard Headquarters offices (e.g. , CG- ENG and CG- OES) as needed to ensure 
that any substitution of required equipment, materials, apparatus, arrangements, procedures or tests provides an equivalent level of safety . 
 In general, pressure vessels for human occupancy (PVHOs) must be designed, constructed, inspected and stamped in accordance American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) PVHO- 1, “Safety Standard for Pressure Vessels for Human Occupancy.” Piping systems m ust be 
designed in accordance with 46 CFR Subchapter F and electrical equipment must be designed in accordance with 46 CFR Subchapter J. Dive equipment requirements are specified in 46 CFR 197.300 through 197.346 and dive operational requirements are speci fied in 46 CFR  197.400 
through 197.488.    
 
############
Alternatives to the specified requirements will be considered on a case by case basis.  Authorized Classification Society Dive Safety Certificates and International Diving system Safety Certificates are not considered as equivalent to 46 CFR subpart 197 requirements; however,  
 these certificates will be considered in making an equivalency determination.  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
A. Certificate of Compliance (COC)       G3-3 
1. Application          G3-3 
2. Administration         G3-4              
3. Options A , B, or C        G3-4 
4. Load Line Certificate         G3-5 
5. U.S. Territorial Sea/ Contiguous  Zone Restrictions     G3-5 
6. Financial R esponsibility for Oil Pollution      G3-6 
7. Prevention of Oil Pollution  and IOPP Compliance     G3-6 
8. Discharges of Pollut ants from OCS Facilities     G3-6             
9. IMO MODU Code         G3-6 
10. SOLAS Certificates         G3-6 
 
B. Specific Requirements Per taining to Options A, B, or  C, P rescribed          G3-9 
under  33 CFR § 143.207 and 146.205       
1. Units Applying f or a COC under Option A      G3-9 
2. Units Applying f or a COC under Option B      G3-9 
3. Units Applying for a COC under Option C      G3-10 
 
C. Equivalency of Panama’s Existing MODU Rules      G3-10 
1. Applicability          G3-10 
2. Notification          G3-10 
3. Issuance of a COC         G3-10 
 
D. Equivalency of Marshall Island ’s Existing MODU Rules     G3-12 
1. Applicability          G3-12 
2. Issuance of a COC         G3-12 
 
E. Stability           G3-13 
 
F. Foreign MODU Operating Manuals       G3-14 
 
G. General Safety Requirements       G3-14 
1. Workplace Safety         G3-14 
2. Drydock Examination/Special Exam in Lieu of Drydocking   G3-14 
3. Cranes          G3-15 
4. Pressure Vessel Internal Exams      G3-16 
5. Lifesaving Appliances                    
6. Carriage of Exposure Suits        G3-17 
7. Fire Safety          G3-17 
8. Alarms, Remote Controls, and Other Safety Devices               
9. Emergency Lighting Systems        G3-18 


G3 - 2  10. Helicopter Facilities         G3-18 
11. Navigational  Lighting        G3-18 
 
H. Acceptance of Foreign Equipment        G3-19 
 I. Foreign Flagged Units Stacked or Laid -up on the U.S. OCS,    G3-19 
Contiguous  Zone, or Territorial Waters 
 J. Citizenship Requir ements         G3-19 
 K. Emergency Evacuation Plan        G3-19           
 L. COC: Failure to Meet Requir ements       G3-20 
 
M. MARPOL ANNEX VI         G3-20 
1. Applicability          G3-20 
2. Definitions          G3-21 
3. Inspections          G3-21 
4. Certificates          G3-21 
5. Exceptions/Exemptions        G3-21 
6. Underway          G3-22 
7. Vessels with Dynamic Positioning ( DP)     G3-22 
 
N. Risked -Based Targeting of Foreign Flagged MODUs     G3-22 
1. Introduction         G3-22 
2. The Matrix          G3-23 
3. Procedures          G3-23 
4. MODU Safety and Environmental Protection Compliance    G3-24 
Targeting Matrix Scoring 
5. Targeting Decision and Examination Frequency    G3-27 
6. Priority Downgrade Clause        G3-27 
7. Stacked MODUs        G3-28 
8. Random Examinations        G3-28             
9. Documentation of Foreign- Flagged MODU Exam Activities  G3-28             
10. MODU Matrix         G3-31           
 
O. Cross Reference of Regulations Pertaining toU.S. and Foreign Flag MODUs G3-32 
 
 
 
A. CERTIFICATE  OF COMPLIANCE  (COC)   
 
The regulations prescribed in 33 CFR , Subchapter N , establish minimum  standards for all 
MODUs operating on the U.S. OCS, including undocumented MODUs and those documented 
under  the laws of a foreign nation. The purpose of these regulations is to ensure that all MODUs 
operating on the U.S. OCS are designed, equipped, and operated at a level of s afety generally   
equivalent to or greater than that of U.S. MODUs certified in accordance with Title 4 6 CFR, 
Parts 107, 108 and 109. Prior to engaging and when engaged in OCS activities, each foreign MODU must have onboard a valid Coast Guard issued Certificate of Compliance ( COC) , Form 
        
############
 
1. Application  
 
It is highly recommended t he owner or builder of a foreign MODU apply for an examination 
for obtaining a COC at least 6 months prior to engaging in U.S. OCS activities by 
submitting : 
 
a. A written or e -mailed request for COC examination to the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection (OCMI), of the marine inspection zo ne in which the unit intends to 
operate; and 
 b. evidence that all  applicable user fees have been paid in full . 
 
Full COC exams are not normally conducted overseas, however, certain portions of new vessel trials (DP) may be witnessed by overseas Coast Guard inspectors as resources allow.   
All efforts should be made to coordinate these pre- inspection opportunities with an overseas 
inspection office and communicate the results with the local OCMI where the unit will 
eventually receive its COC.  All activities  should be documented in MISLE . See Chapter 
1.C. Examination/Inspection Teams, for more information on conducting over seas 
exams/inspections.  Note : Some current U. S. vessel  inspection laws and regulations include several references to 
the C ertificate  of Compliance (COC), Form CG -3585. Unfortunately, other out dated 
regulations specify the use of a Letter of Compliance (LOC).  C oast Guard policy in the CFR, 
NVICs and elsewhere, has not been changed completely to account for this newer 
terminology. For the purposes of the OCS, LOC shall be taken to mean COC and shall be valid for a period of two years.
 Note:  Any reference to IMO MODU Code is the 1979 Code unless otherwise noted.  
  
2. Administration  
 
a. All documents submitted to the Coast Guard must be accompanied by an English 
translation if the origin als are in a foreign language. An example of a COC pre -
inspection information sheet is located at the end of this section and may be used to 
request vessel d ata when scheduling a COC exam. The OCMI shall NOT schedule 
or conduct a COC exam until the appropriate  user fees have been paid.  
 
b. COC’s  are valid  for 2 years, or until the unit departs the U.S. OCS, provided the 
MODU undergoes an annual examination within 3 months before or  after the COC 
anniversary date and continues to meet the requirements of 33 Subchapter N . The 
COC is to be maintained onboard the vessel and be readily avai lable  to Coast Guard 
personnel upon request . 
 c. To avoid delays, the OCMI is encouraged to complete C OCs when requested within 
three months of their expiration date. At the  discretion of, and with the prior approval 
from, the local OCMI, MODUs with expired C OCs (renewal or annual ) that are not 
more than three  months past due, and with no indications that the vessel is not in 
compliance  with applicable laws and regulations, should not be restricted from  
commencing operations prior to an examination. Vessel owners, operators and agents are required by 46 CFR 146.202 to provide notice to the District Commander of the area in which it intends to operate at least 14 days in advance  of arrival on the OCS. 
 d. Current  U.S. vessel inspection law s, regulations  and documents include references to 
both “Certificate of Compliance (COC)” and “Letters of Compliance (LOC)”. The 
Certificate of Compliance (COC) may be used in lieu of Letters of Compliance (LOC). While t he terminology has changed, the scope of  the exam  remains the  same. 
 e. The COC may be issued  with certain outstanding discrepancies permitted at the 
discretion of the cognizant OCMI.  The disc repancies will be noted in the 
examination r ecord section of the COC  and documented in MISLE. The COC will 
NOT be issued with uncorrected discrepancies if during the course of the inspection the ship or the crew is unable to navigate safely (if applicable), maintain the fire fighting and lifesaving equipment, prevent pollution of the environment, maintain adequate stability, watertight integrity, and safely engage in OCS activities. Discrepancies left uncorrected from an initial COC exam will be cause for denial of  
subsequent COCs. 
 
############
 
3. Options A , B, or C . 
 
Foreign Flagged MODUs engaged in OCS activities must comply with one of the  following  
 options per 33 CFR Subchapter N , except for those exempted from design and equipment 
requirements b y 33 CFR 143.201:  
 
a. Option A : U.S. Standards (33 CFR 143.207(a)  and 146.205(a) ): The MODUs design 
equipment, and operating standards must comply with 46 CFR Parts 108 and 109. 
 
b. Option B : Equivalent Standards of Documenting Nation (33 CFR 143.207(b)  and 
146.205(b) ).  The MODU must comply with the design, equipment, and operating 
standards of the MODUs documenting nation, if they provide a level of safety 
equivalent to or greater than that set forth in 46 CFR Parts 108 and 109. Currently Marshall Island s and Panama have  been accorded this status.  
 
c. Option C : IMO MODU Code Compliance (33 CFR 143.207(c)  and 146.205(c) ).  The 
MODU must comply with the standards for design, equipment and operations  
standards  as set forth in the 1979 IMO MODU Code  IMO Ass embly Resolution 
A.414 ( XI).   
 
Coast Guard policy determined the  design and equipment standards of the 2009 MODU 
Code to be as least as effective as the design and  equipment standards of the 1979 and 1989 
MODU Codes  (see CG -ENG Policy Letter 02 -12). Therefore, a foreign MODU in 
compliance with the design and equipment standards of the 2009 MODU Code may be accepted under 33 CFR 143.207(c).  Foreign flag MODUs are issued IMO MODU Code Safety Certificates by their respective governments or third party organizations designated by their governments . 
 
 
4. Load Line Certifica te 
 
Each MODU documented in a country signatory to the 1966 International Convention on Load Lines (ICLL) shall have a valid ICLL certificate. If the MODU does NOT have a valid ICLL certificate or is documented under the laws of a nation not signatory to the 1966 convention the owner must apply for and obtain a Form “B” certificate in accordance with the provisions of 46 CFR Part  42. Owners  and operators should be cognizant of t he annual 
survey requirements. Un -classed  units built prior to 1969 will not be  required to obtain a load 
line but will require a freeboard assignment. Application s for a freeboard assignment should 
be directed to the Marine Safety Center . 
 
 
5. U.S. Territorial Sea/ Contiguous  Zone Restrictions 
 
The COC permits operation of a unit  only upon the U.S. OCS. Units entering the U.S. 
contiguous  zone (33 CFR 2.28) or territorial sea (33 CFR 2.22) must be in compliance with 
applicable pollution prevention regulations (33 CFR 156 and 155), marine sanitation device   
 regulations (33 CFR 159) , navigation safety regulations (33 CFR 164) and the requirements 
for financial responsibility  for water pollution (33 CFR 138 or 30 CFR  553) . Units not in 
compliance with these regulations are prohibited from entry into these areas and restrictions 
will b e note d in MISLE and on the COC. 
 
 
6. Financial Responsibility  for Oil Pollution  
 
Prior to issuance of the COC, the owner  or operator of each foreign documented MODU 
must obtain a Certificate of Financial Responsibility and provide proof of Oil Spill Financial Responsibility for  Offshore Facilities  in accordance with 33 CFR 138 or 30 CFR 553 
respectively.   
 
############
 
7. Prevention of Oil Pollution  and IOPP Compliance  
 
All units must comply with the provisions of 33 CFR Parts 151 and 155 for the prevention of oil pollution. All ocean going units 400 gross tons and above must comply with the equipment requirements  on the International Oil Pollution Prevention (IOPP) certificate  
(MARPOL 73/78). 
 
 
8. Discharges of Pollutants from OCS Facilities  
 
When engaged in drilling operations, each unit must have a valid  National Pollution 
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, as required, issued by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).  
 
 
9. IMO MODU Code  
 
All MODUs electing to comply with 33 CFR  Subchapter  N with an International Maritime 
Organization (IMO) Certification may be determined to be in compliance with 33 CFR Subchapter N if it is in full com pliance with the IMO MODU Code.  Exceptions, exemptions, 
equivalencies, or modifications must be  reviewed and accepted by the cognizant OCMI prior 
to conducting operations on the OCS.  All requests and approvals or denials should be documented in MISLE as a special note.  
 
 
10. SOLAS Certificates  
 
a. Foreign flagged MODUs  “propelled by mechanical means" and over 500 GTs, must 
hold valid  SOLAS and IMO certification s. 
  
(1) Safety Constructio n 
 
(2) Safety Equipment  
 (3) Radiotelephony or Radiotelegraphy (if applicable) 
 (4) International Safety Management (ISM) Certificate/ Document of Compliance 
(DOC) (not applicable to MODUs that are not propelled by mechanical 
means)   
 
(5) International Ship Security Certificate (ISSC) (*Note per SOLAS Chapter XI -2 
reg 1.5, it does not apply to a MODU "on location" but they need it to move from 
location to location, so a MODU should have all of the required equipment and certificates).   Inspectors should carefully consider the applicability of 33 CFR 104 
and 106 depe nding on the MODUs location and operations.  
 (6) International Oil Pollution Prevention Certificate (IOPP)  (7) Shipboard Oil Pollution Emergency Plan (SOPEP)  
 (8) International Air Pollution  Prevention Certificate (IAPP) 
 (9) National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit (as applicable)  
 
b.   A valid, IMO MODU Code Certificate may be accepted in lieu of the required 
SOLAS certificates for those matters covered by the MODU Code. In NO case will a MODU Code Certificate containing exemptions or  exceptions be accepted as an 
adequate substitute for the required SOLAS certificates.  
 
c.   Individuals required to hold Standards of Training, Certification and 
Watchkeeping (STCW) certificates (applicable to MODUs propelled by mechanical means) must mak e them available for examination .  
 Pre-Inspection Information Sheet for a Certificate of Compliance (COC)  
 
Cognizant OCMI: ___________________ Requested exam  date : ________________________ 
 
Name of Vessel: ______________________      IMO Number: __________________________ 
 
Type (semi -submersible, j ack-up, drillship, etc…) _____________________________________ 
 
Call Sign: __________________________  Nation of Registry: __________________________ 
  
Is the u nit Classed?:    Yes ______    or      No ______ 
 
Classification Society: ___________________________________________________________ 
 
IMO MODU Code Certificate ?:   Yes ____  No ___   SOLAS Certificates?:  Yes ____  No _____ 
 
Issuing Authority: ______________________________________________________________ 
 
Owner/ Operator: _______________________________________________________________ 
 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Total Persons to be Accommodated : _____    
 
Equipped with Dynamic Positioning: Yes ____   No ____        DP Class notation: ____________ 
 
(If yes, include Safe Manning Certificate information (or include copy of document) ) 
 
############
Intended Area of Operation: ______________________________________________________ 
 
Location of exam: ______________________________________________________________ 
 
Inspec tion Option Desired:  
Check one:                 Check one:  
 
33 CFR 143.207 (a) ______   Initial ______ 
 
33 CFR 143.207 (b) ______   Renewal ______ 
 
33 CFR 143.207 (c) ______   Annual ______ 
 
User Fees Paid?:  Yes _____   No _____  Owner/Operator representative: ___________________________  Contact Number: _________          
    Signature: ___________________  Date: ___________ 
  
B. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS  PERTAINING TO OPTIONS A, B, OR C PRESCRIBED UNDER 33 
CFR  §143.207  AND 146.205 
 
 
1. Units Applying for a COC under Option A  
 
a. New MODUs  – All new units must comply with the design, equipment  and operating 
standards contained in 46 CFR  Parts 108 and 109.  
 
b. Existing MODUs  – All existing units will be inspected as in the above paragraph. 
However, units contracted for before January 3, 1979, and issued a Certificate of 
Inspection (COI) under 46 Subchapter I may continue to meet the requirements in force at the time of the COI issuance but must also meet the applicable requirements of 46 Subchapter I -A as specified in Navigation and Vessel I nspection Circular, 
“Inspection and Certification of Existing Mobile Offshor e Drilling Units” (Appendix 
A of 46 CFR Part 109)  until the unit is rebuilt. After a rebuild, the unit must meet the 
requirements of 46 CFR Subchapter I -A.  The definition for REBU ILT can be found 
in 33 CFR 140.10. 
 c. Acceptance of Foreign Equi pment  – foreign equipment may be accepted by the 
OCMI in accordance with Part H  of this Chapter (3) . 
 
 
2. Units Applying for a COC under Option B  
  a. The owners of a new or existing MODU seeking a COC under this option should ascertain whether the flag state’s MODU standards have received a statement  of 
equivalency from Commandant (CG -CVC) . The  flag state’s MODU standards are 
compared against Coast Guard inspection standards and the equivalency is granted when it is determined the flag state’s standard provide a level of safety and is generally equal to those  of U.S. MODUs.  
 b. If not, the flag state must submit its MODU standards to Commandant (CG -CVC) for 
review and approval. The submittal should be made at least six months  prior to 
commencing a COC  inspection under this option. 
 c. The units must meet the operating requirements specified in 33 CFR 146.205(b). 
Until the Coast Guard has determined that  the st andards of the flag state are generally 
equivalent to those of the U.S., a foreign flagged MODU may not obtain a COC under this option. Questions concerning acceptance of equivalencies should be  
addressed to Commandant (CG -CVC) . 
 d. See Parts C and D of this Section (G) for information on equivalencies for Panama  
and Marshall Islands. 
 
 
3. Units Applying for a COC under Option C  
 
a. The owner of a new or existing unit should present the cognizant OCMI with a valid, full compliance IMO MODU Code Certificate issued by the flag state or agent authorized by the documenting nation to act on its behalf.  
 b. Certificates with exemptions or exceptions will be reviewed by the OCMI to ensure 
the spirit of the Code has been met. Units must meet the operating requirements 
specified by 33 CFR 146.205(c). The OCMI may deny any exemption or exception 
issued by a flag state.  
 
############
 
C. EQUIVALENCY OF PANAMA 'S EXISTING MODU  RULES  
 
 
1. Applicability  
 
a. Panama’s MODU rules are based on the IMO MODU Code.  
 b. Panama's Technical Note 1/83 modified its MODU rules for existing units that cannot comply with the IMO MODU Code. An evaluation of Panama's Technical Note 1/83 determined that, the rules for exis ting units are generally equivalent to those provided 
under 46 CFR Part 108, as appli ed to existing U.S. flag units  with the exception of 
those items listed in paragraph 3 below . 
 
 
2. Notification  
 
Commandant ( CG-CVC) must be notified if examinations of Panamanian MODUs for 
issuance of C OCs under either 33 CFR 143.207(b) or 33 CFR 143.207(c) reveal a significant 
or an inor dinate number of discrepancies.  
 
 
3. Issuance of a COC 
 
Existing Panamanian MO DUs are eligible to receive an C OC under 33 CFR 143.207(b) 
provided that -- 
 
a. They were built, under construction, or contracted for prior to 5 April 1982 and are  
documented under the laws of Panama;  
 b. They hold and are in compliance with a valid Panamanian MODU Safety Cer tificate 
issued under the provisions of Technical Note 1/83;  
 
c. The unit's boilers and pressure vessels have been satisfactorily internally examined or 
hydrostatically tested within 12 months of the date of application for a  COC; 
 
d. A dry dock or special underwater examination in lieu of drydock has been 
satisfactoril y conducted within 24 months of the date of the C OC application;  
 
e. All units (except those unclassed units built prior to 1969) have a valid loadline;  
 
f. Units comply with the 70 and 100 knot wind intact stability criteria. A relaxation to a 
minimum 50 knot wind criteria may be permitted based on satisfactory previous service and appropriate limitation; 
 g. Units comply with the applicable operating requirements of 33 CFR 146.205;  
 h. All equipment installed in Zone 1 (Class 1, Division 1) or Zone 2 (Cla ss 1, Division 
2) hazardous areas, as defined in 46 CFR 108.170 through 177, is explosion- proof, 
intrinsically safe, or purged and pressurized, and in good material condition;  
 i. All units comply with the provisions of 46 CFR 108.123 and 108.127, in addition to meeting the structural fire safety requirements for interior stairways and wood 
construction in Technical Note 1/83;  
 j. All units are in substantial compliance with the helo deck fire safety equipment standards found in 46 CFR 108.486 through 108.496 and 46 CFR 108.653;  
 k. The unit's lifeboats are rigid, totally enclosed, motor -propelled, fire protected, davit 
launched survival craft, and are constructed to comply with the requirements of SOLAS 74, Chapter III Regulations 5, 6 and 7 for li feboats or the provisions of 46 
CFR 160.035. 
 l. Lifeboat equipment is  in accordance with 46 CFR 108, subpart E  or the pr ovisions of 
SOLAS 74, Chapter III, for lifeboats.  
 m. Life rafts  are equipped for ocean service in accordance with 46 CFR 108, S ubpart E  
or the provisions of SOLAS 74, Chapter III, for life rafts ; 
 n. Lifesaving appliance launching devices have been satisfactorily weight tested within 12 months of the date of the C OC application; and 
 o. Life preservers are provided for 125 percent of the persons allowed on board and are  
        equipped with whistles, lights and retro- reflective material in accordance with 46  
       CFR 108 , subpart E . 
 
############
p. All units comply with the requirements of 33 CF R 144.30 pertaining to exposure 
suits.  
 
 
D. EQUIVALENCY OF MARSHALL ISLAND ’S EXISTING MODU  RULES  
 
 
1. Applicability  
 
MODUs possessing a valid Marshall Islands’ MODU Safety Certificate of Compliance 
issued in accordance with the Republic of the Marshall Islands “Mobile Offshore Drilling Unit Standards”, Publication MI -293 must also meet the requirem ents identified below 
before a C OC will be issued. Compliance with these requirements will be verified at the 
discretion of the OC MI to which application for a C OC has been made.  
 
 
2. Issuance of a COC   
 
a. All units shall comply with the applicable provisions of 33 CFR Subchapter N . This 
includes , but is not limited to inspections, investigations, citizenship requirements , 
restrictions  on employment, workplace safety and health, and operational 
requirements for foreign MODUs. 
 
b. All units shall comply with the applicable provisions for pollution prevention. This includes , but is not limited to the Act to Prevent Pollution from Ships, and MARPOL 
73/78. 
 c. All units shall comply with the applicable provisions of 33 CFR Part 164 – Navigation Safety Regulations. This includes, but is not limited to charts, publications, navigation equipment, testing, maintenance and reporting requirements. 
 d. Testing and Inspection of Pressure Vessels and Relief Valves – Pressure vessels shall be internally examined once every five years and relief valves shall be tested twice in five years with no interval more than three years in accordance with 46 CFR 61.10. 
 e. Additional Lifesaving Equipment – All units shall comply with the additional lifesaving requirements contained in 46 CFR 108.503.  Drillships not in possession of a valid MODU Safety Certificate (1989) shall comply with the requirements of 46 CFR Subchapter W. 
 f. Maintenance, Testing & Inspection of Lifesaving Equipment – All units shall comply 
with the maintenance, testing an d inspection requirements contained in 46 CFR 
109.301. All required maintenance, tests and inspections shall be documented. 
 g. Testing & Inspection of Fire Fighting Equipment – All units shall ensure that each 
hand and semi -portable fire extinguisher, fix ed fire -extinguishing system and gas 
detection system shall be tested and inspected annually in accordance with the 
requirements contained in 46 CFR 109.223. All required tests and inspections shall be 
documented. 
 
h. Hospital Space, First Aid Kit & Litter – All units carrying 12 or more persons on a 
voyage, that is more than three days , shall have a dedicated hospital space on board 
that complies with 46 CFR 108.209 or 46 CFR 108.210. All units shall have a first 
aid kit that complies with 46 CFR 108.707,  and a litter capable of being used on the type of helicopter that service s the unit in accordance with the requirements of 46 
CFR 108.709. 
 i. Hazardous Locations – All units shall comply with the electrical wiring materials and methods required by 46 CFR  111.60 for the hazardous locations listed in 46 CFR 
 j. The OCMI may require a unit to carry specialized or additional equipment if the conditions, arrangement or service of the unit present uniquely hazardous 
circumstances that are not adequately addressed by existing requirements or standards.  
 
############
 
E. STABILITY  
 
A Load Line Certificate is NOT sufficient to verify adequate stability of a unit. Acceptance of stability will be based on one of the following criteria:  Review and approval of the stability calculations and data contained in the operating manual by the Marine Safety Center to the standards contained in 46 CFR Parts  170 and 174. 
 
Examination of stability data contained in the operating manual accepted under full IMO  MODU 
Code stand ards by the flag state. In cases when a unit’s stability has been determined under less 
than full IMO criteria, a stability test  may be required to verify lightship data. A n operating 
manual not containing supporting calculations and inclining experiment/deadweight survey data, submitted to the Coast Guard for approval will be determined  to be inadequate.   
 
Examination of alternative stability criteria accepted by the flag state that provides an equivalent level of safety as permitted by Section 3.3.3 of t he IMO MODU Code.  
  
 
F. FOREIGN MODU  OPERATING MANUALS  
 
 
All foreign units should have operating manuals complying with the applicable pr ovisions 
specified in 33 CFR 146.205. T he unit's operating manual must be  submitted to the cognizant 
OCMI for review. The contents of the manual must be in English in addition to any other 
languages understood by personnel routinely onboard.  
 
No Coast Guard "approval" or "examined" stamps shall  be applied to these manuals .  
 
It should be noted that principal approval of the manual comes from the flag state or their designated representative. If an operations manual is not flag state approved, the Marine Inspector must issue a deficiency requiring Flag State approval of the man ual within 30 days.  
 
 
G. GENERAL SAFETY REQUIREMENTS  
 
 
1. Workplace Safety 
 
Owners and operators of all foreign flagged MODUs operating on the U.S. OCS are responsible for maintaining those units in compliance with workplace safety and health regulations and free  from recognized hazar ds as specified in 33 C FR 142. The Coast Guard 
and OSHA share  joint responsibility for the  occupational safety and health of personnel on 
OCS facilities  per an MOU signed in 1982.  See MSM Vol  II Section G, Chapter 1, Part D, 
for further discussion on the  Coast Guard /OSHA MOU.  
 
 
2. Drydock Examination/ Special  Exam in Lieu of Drydocking 
 
In order  to verify the unit’s structural integrity and continued compliance with the design 
standard as specified by 33 CFR 143.201 and .207, all MODUs should undergo a drydock or special exam at the following intervals : 
 
(a) Units applying for a COC under Option A  – Under current Coast Guard regulations, 
all other class of vessels require the t wice in a five year interval for dry docking or 
special examination .  Coast Guard guidance allows MODUs the same option with 
drydock examinations conducted in the pre sence of a Coast Guard inspector .  These 
may be conducted at least twice within any 5 -year period after issu ance of  a COI or 
COC with no more than 3 years elapsing  between any two examinations. 
Documentation of recent drydock examinations or special exams in lieu  of 
drydocking witnessed by classification societies recognized by the Coast Guard  may 
be accepted.  
  
############
(b) Units applying for a COC under Option B – Units must comply with the requirements 
of the flag state which have been determined  by Commandant to provide a level of 
safety equivalent to those  provided by U.S . requirements. Unit owners  must present 
evidence to the satisfaction of the cognizant OCMI that a  drydock examination or a 
special exam in lieu  of drydock was conducted in accordance with  the flag state’s 
standards .   
 (c) Units applying for a COC under Option C - Evidence of full compliance with  
provisions of the IMO MODU Code pertaining to all required surveys must be 
presented to a n accepted by the cognizant OCMI.  
 
The Coast G uard will NOT normally conduct drydock examinations or special exams in lieu 
of drydocking on foreign units. However, if the unit’s structural integrity  is in question, the 
cognizant OCMI may require an examination to be conducted by the flag state with Coast 
Guard inspectors in attendance.  
 
 
3. Cranes 
 
All pedestal mounted revolving cranes must be in compliance with the design requirements  
and operating standards as outlined below:  
 
a. Units applying for  a COC under Option A  – Cranes aboard units are to be  inspected, 
tested and operated in compliance with the requirements contained in 46 CFR Parts 108 and 109. 
 b. Units applying for  a COC under Option B – The cranes may be inspected, tested and 
operated in accordance with the flag state’s standards for cran es if those standards are 
determined by Commandant to provide a level of safety generally equivalent to or greater  than that  provided in 46 CFR Parts 107, 108 and 109. 
 c. Units applying for  a COC under Option C – The cranes should be inspected, tested 
and operated in accordance with Chapter 12 of the  MODU Code. The unit owners 
should present evidence that the cranes have been examined and accepted  by the flag 
state or its authorized representative within 12 months of the dat e of application for a 
COC.  
 
All crane testing and inspections should be witnessed and conducted by the American Bureau  of Shipping (ABS), Det Norske Veritas (DNV), or th e International Cargo Gear 
Bureau, Inc. (ICGB) for cranes under certification by these organizations . Certification of 
cranes on units examined  under Option A; should be conducted by a recognized organization 
(RO)  or other authority  designated by the flag state to conduct such testing and inspections .  
  
 
4. Pressure Vessel Internal Exams  
 
 All Options  - Regar dless of which Option A, B, or C that an owner chooses for their MODU, 
the inspection frequency regulations contained 46 CFR 61.10 for pressure vessels apply. 
 
Foreign flagged MODUs operating on the OCS shall have pressure vessels internally 
examined once every five years. In addition, all relief valves shall be tested twice in five 
years with no intervals more than three years. The only exception to this requirement  is per  
33 CFR 143.207 paragraph (b), Option B, where the a ccepted standard of a unit’s flag state 
or documenting nation are more stringent.  It is the responsibility of the unit’s owner to present sufficient documentation demonstrating such inspections and tests have been conducted and witnessed by authorized representatives within the specified intervals. If sufficient evidence is not available, they will need to be 
inspected or tested to the satisfaction  of the cognizant OCMI prior to issuance of the COC. 
Marine Insp ector s shall ensure that t he internal exam and  relief val ve tests dates are 
documented in MISLE.  All fired and unfired pressure vessels should be designed, fabricated, and identified in accordance with  the requirements of the ASME Code, the Coast Guard, or other authority 
recognized by the flag state. Additionally, each pressure vessel must have a relieving device set in accordance with the provisions contained in 46 CFR 54.15- 5(c).  Relief devices should 
be ASME Code stamped or built to an equivalent  standar d recognized by the flag state.   
 
############
 
5. Lifesaving Appliances  
 
All Options  – To meet the compliance requirements for foreign MODUs, all units must be 
equipped with life saving appliances equal to or greater than the requirements of 46 CFR Subpart E.  A unit in compliance with the 2009 MODU Code may be determined to be in compliance with these requirements.   
 a. All lifeboats  on units must be approved survival  craft constructed to comply with the 
provisions of SOLAS 74, Chapter III as amend ed, the I MO Lifesaving Appliances 
(LSA ) Code, or have a Coast Guard approval in the 160.135 series. 
 b. All lifeboats must be equipped in accordance with the  provisions of the  IMO LSA 
Code or the provisions of 46 CFR Table 108.575(b). 
 c. All life rafts  must be constructed and approved in accordance with the provisions of  
SOLAS 74, Chapter III, as amended by the IMO LSA  Code, or have a Coast Guard 
approval in the 160.118 or 160.151 series. 
 d. Rigid life rafts must be equipped to the SOLAS A or B standard or to 46 CFR Table 
108.575(b). 
 
e. All units must provide life jackets in accordance with the  IMO M ODU Code or 46 
CFR 108.580(b). 
 f. The units owners must present evidence acceptable to the OCMI that the lifesaving 
appliance launching devices were satisfactorily weight tested in accordance with the 
provisions of 46 CFR 109.301(i) within 12 months  of the application for a COC. 
Additional weight tests of these devices will be required in accordance with 46 CFR 
109.301(i). 
 
g. All survival equipment  locations shall be marked in accordance with SOLAS  74, 
Chapter III, Regulation 9. ( NVIC 3 -87) offers guidance for the types of placards. 
 
 
6. Carriage of Exposure Suits  
 
All Options – Foreign units on the U.S. OCS operating north of 32 degrees N orth latitude 
shall carry immersion suits approved meeting SOLAS 74, Chapter III, LSA Code or the. Coast Guard under approval series 160.171 
 
 
7. Fire Safety  
 
All Options  – All fire extinguishing systems, fire extinguishers, fire detection systems and 
sprinkler systems are to  be inspected annually. In absence of adequate documentation that 
such testing has been made by the flag state or its authorized representatives, test ing will be 
required by the Coast Guard to the sati sfaction of the cognizant OCMI. On all units where 
wood is utilized in construction of the accommodation spaces, each space must be equipped with a smoke or heat detector satisfactory to the cognizant OCMI . 
 
 
8. Alarms, Remote Controls, and Other Safety Devices 
 
All Options  – The satisfactory operation of installed machinery and switchboard safety 
devices, all remote closures and shutdowns, and all alarms should be demonstrated at each 
examination for issua nce of the COC.  
  
9. Emergency Lighting  Systems 
 
All Options  – An emergency lighting system capable of a minimum of 12 continuous hours 
of operation is to be installed in passageways, stairways, escape routes to lifesaving craft, 
galleys, pantries , emergency power rooms, mess rooms, recreation rooms, manned 
machinery spaces, and control rooms. Additional emergency lights should be installed to provide adequate illumination for the entire launching process of lifeboat/capsules and liferafts from the  stowed position to the water. Relay controlled battery powered lanterns are 
acceptable for these purposes, and should be specifically required when a MODU is equipped with an emergency total rig shutdown system. 
 
############
 
10. Helicopter  Facilities  
 a. Helicopter facilities aboard all foreign MODUs are to meet one of the following standards including requirements for helicopter deck firefighting  equipment and 
helicopter fueling facilities: 
 
(1) Option A – The requirements of 46 CFR Parts 108 and 109. 
 (2) Option B – The requirements of the flag state if  they are accepted by COMDT 
and provide a level of safety equivalent to or exceeding those spe cified by 46 
CFR Parts 108 and 109. 
 (3) Option C – The requirements of the IMO MODU Code, Chapters 9 and 13. 
 
b. Green Perimeter lights: The Coast Guard considers the helicopter lighting scheme of the 2009 MODU Code, Chapter 13 "perimeter lights" to be to be a t l east as ef f ecti ve 
as the requirements of 46 CFR 108.241.  CG -ENG has documented the acceptance of 
the i n ternational "green light" scheme on foreign M ODUs (se e CG-ENG P olicy 
Letter 02 -12). An OCMI should use these CG -ENG pol i cy l etters as evi dence of  
compliance for the purpose of issuing a COC  to a MODU under 143.207; an 
individual waiver should not be requir ed. 
 
 
11. Navigation Lighting 
 
MODU s are required to comply with the Navigation Rules. Per Navigation Rule 3 and as 
defined in 33 CFR 140.10.  M ODUs are vessel s, and as such shal l  abi de by the Navi gati on 
Rules and properly display navigation lights and shapes accordingly (i.e. , Rules 22, 23(a), 
27(d), etc.). MODUs, particularly when drilling, are also subject to other regulations denoted 
in Title 33 CFR, parts 67 and 140-147 (Subchapter N)  
  
 
 
 
 
 
H.  ACCEPT ANCE OF FOREIGN EQUIPMENT  
 Where Coast  Guard approved equipment is specifically required, foreign equipment may be 
accepted in accordance with the provision s of 33 CFR 140.15. The OCMI may require additional 
equipment as necessary to ensure that a general level of safety equivalent to 46 CFR 108 and 109 is maintained. To ensure a level of safety equal to or greater than required by U.S. regulations, 
any equipment specifically prohibited on U.S. units will be prohibited on foreign units. 
 
 
I. FOREIGN FLAGGED  UNITS STACKED OR LAID-UP ON THE  U.S.  OCS,  CONTIGUOUS  
ZONE, OR TERRITORIAL WATERS  
 
Foreign flagged units stacked or laid- up on the U.S. OCS, or contiguous zone or in territorial 
waters, should comply with applicable Coast Guard requirements applied to U.S. flag units when 
in this status. Owners and operators of foreign flagged units should contact the cognizant OCMI prior to stacking the unit in the aforementioned areas to discuss the applicable requirements. Owners a nd operators are further advised that should the units reside in U.S. state waters, they 
may be subject to additional requirements imposed by the cognizant state authorities. 
 
 
J.  CITIZENSHIP REQUIREMENTS  
 Prior to commencing drilling operations on the U.S. OCS , the owner/operator of a foreign 
flagged MODU shall ensure that the citizenship requirements set f orth in 33 CFR 141, are met. 
Amplifying guidance for compliance with the aforementioned regulations can be found in NVIC 
 
############
 
K. EMERGENCY EVACUATION PLAN  
 
All foreign units should have an approved Emergency Evacuation Plan (EEP) complying with the applicable provisions specified in 33 CFR 146.210.  Prior to the initial COC, the EEP shall be submitted to the cognizant OCMI for revi ew. The contents of the manual must be in English 
in addition to any other language understood by personnel routinely onboard. History has shown that emergency evacuations are required from time to time and a well thought out EEP can save lives.  Note:  A vessel being propelled by a dynamic positioning system (e.g., MODU) is considered 
underway even when hovering on location, but, may also be "restricted in her ability to maneuver" as defined by Navigation Rule 3 (International -Inland).   
  
 
L. COC:  FAILURE TO MEET REQUIREMENTS  
 
If at any time the OCMI determines the unit is NOT in compliance with the requirements for the purpose of obtaining a COC, regardless of the Option chosen, the Coast Guard may:  
 
1. Withhold issuance of the original COC unti l the requirements are met;  
 2. Withhold issuance of a subsequent  COC until the requirements are met; 
 3. Suspend an unexpired COC after a reinspection is init iated due to crew complaint or 
casualty investigation until requirements are met; 
 4. Revoke an unexpired COC after re -inspection if the unit operates without complying with 
Coast Guard orders to correct serious discrepancies or unlawful conditions; or  
 5. Initiate civil penalty procedures against the owner, operator, or person- in-charge if  
violations of 33 CFR 142.1 or  other deficiencies remain uncorrected after official 
notification is given and a reasonable time for corrections expires.  
 
The Coast Guard cannot detain  a MODU on the OCS, but when deciding whether 
deficiencies warrant a MI t o withhold or revoke a COC, use the IMO Procedures for Port 
State Control (Resolution A.787(19) as amended by resolution A.882(21)) as  (Appendix 1) guidance . In all instances where the COC is revoked or withheld, The Bureau of Safety 
and Environmental Enf orcement (BSEE) shall be notified by the Coast Guard. 
 
 
M. MARPOL  ANNEX  VI 
 
This section clarifies exemptions on vessel emissions directly arising from the exploration, exploitation and associated offshore processing of sea -bed mineral resources. (MARPOL Annex 
Reg 3.3.1)   
 Note: MODUs do not have to comply with the Vessel General Permit unless they operate in covered waters (generally within the territorial sea). 
 
 
1. Applicability  
 
Fixed and floating drilling rigs and other platforms are required to comply with the 
provisions of MARPOL Annex VI, Regulations for the Prevention of A ir Pollution from 
Ships.  (Per Chapter 1, Reg 1, t he provisions of this Annex shall apply to all ships, except 
where expressly provided by otherwise in regulations 3, 5, 6, 13,  15, 16, and 18 of this 
Annex.)  
  
 
2. Definitions  
 
For the purposes of this regulation, fixed and floating drilling rigs and other platforms means MODUs and FPSOs, involved in the exploration, exploitation and associated offshore processing of  sea- bed mi neral  resources.  
 
 
3. I nspections  
 Fixed and floating drilling rigs (ex. MODUs ) and othe r platforms will be inspected for 
compliance with MARPOL Annex VI . Per Chapter 2, Regulation 5; every ship of 400 gross 
tonnage and above and every fixed and floating drilling rig and other platforms shall be subject to the surveys specified in t his Annex.  
 
############
 
4. Certificates  
 
Fixed and floating MODUs  and other platforms will  recei ve an I A PP certi f i cate. Per 
MARP OL Anne x VI, Chapter 2, Regul ati on 6; an I A PP Certi f i cate shal l  be i ssued, af ter an initial or renewal survey in accordance with the provis ions of regulation 5 of this Annex, to 
platforms and drilling rigs engaged in voyages to water s  under the sovereignty or 
jurisdiction of other Parties. Theref ore a MODU  (without DP) coming from Norway is 
requi red to have an I A PP and meet al l  appl i cabl e reg ulations while engaged in the voyage to 
U.S. waters. But, once it gets to the Gulf of Mexico and it begins drilling it i s exempt f rom 
the following items in section 5 below.  
 
 
5. Exceptions/Exemptions  
 
Revised MARPOL Annex VI (2009 edition), Chapter 1, Re gulation 3 allows for exceptions 
and exemptions. S pe cifica lly re gula tion 3.3.1:  " Emi ssi ons f rom sea -bed mi neral  acti vi ti es"  - 
Emi ssi ons directly arising from the exploration, exploitation and associated offshore 
processing of sea-bed mi neral  resources  are exempt f ro m the provisions of this Annex.   
  
      
 
 
 
 
 
6. Underway 
 While a fixed or floating drilling rig or platform is underway and “ engaged in voyages to 
water s ” , i t and al l  vessel s associ ated (as appl i cabl e) are requi red to meet the r equirements of 
MARPOL Annex  VI. Once the fixed or floating drilling rig or platform begins exploration, 
exploitation and associated offshore processing  of  sea- bed mi neral  resources, they are 
exempt from the  MARPOL Annex VI regulations.  
 
 7. Vessels with Dynamic Pos itio ning (DP) 
 
The Coast Guard considers a vessel operating in DP mode to be a vessel  propelled by 
mechanical means. Any vessel holding position solely through the use of its DP system is considered “underway” and cannot be considered “ on location” . “On location”  means t hat a 
MODU is bottom bearing or moored with anchors placed in the drilling configuration. Per 46 CFR 10.107 “underway” is defined as when “a vessel is not at anchor, made fast to the shore, or aground.”  When referring to a MODU, underway means that the MOD U is not in an on-
location or laid -up status and includes that period of time when the MODU is deploying or 
recovering its mooring system. Because a MODU operating under DP is not at anchor, nor is 
it made fast to shore or the ocean bottom it is by definit ion “underway” and the equipment 
not directly associated with the exploration, exploitation and associated offshore 
processing  of sea- bed mineral resources, (engines utilized for DP, Ships Generator utilized 
to operate navigation equipment, accommodations, etc…) a MODU cannot be exempted 
under Regulation 3 from the provisions of MARPOL Annex VI. 
 
 
N. RISKED -BASED TARGETING OF FOREIGN FLAGGED MODU S 
 
############
 
1. Introduction 
 
This section provides procedures for risk- based targeting of foreign flagged Mobile Offshore 
Drilling Units (MODU) operating on the United States Outer Continental Shelf (OCS). For  Note:  Emissions from marine diesel engines that are solely dedicated to the exploration, 
exploitation and associated offshore processing of sea -bed mineral resources are  exempt from 
the MARPOL Annex VI regulations (see Reg 3 f or list of exempted emissions).  
 
Engines utilized for DP, ship service generators providing power for propulsion, navigation 
equipment, hotel services, etc. are NOT exempt from MARPOL Annex VI."  One  example 
might be a Cement Unit. 
 general guidelines on required documentation of foreign flagged MODU examinations  and 
how to enter activities in MISLE refer to MSM Vol II , Section G, Chapter 1.   
 
Every foreign flagged MODU must meet the requirements of 33 CFR Subchapter N, Part s 
143 and 146, and undergo a Coast Guard examination, to  be issued a COC in accordance 
with 33 CFR 143.210 prior to engaging in OCS activities.  
 
 
2. The Matrix  
 
The Mobile O ffshore Drilling Unit (MODU) Safety and Environmental Protection 
Compliance Targeting Matrix  (located at the end of this Chapter) has been developed based 
on the Port State Control Safety and Environmental Protection Compliance Targeting 
Matrix ; which has been successful in targeting substandard vessels for over 10 years.  The 
matrix will enable the Coast Guard to rationally and systematically determine the probable 
risk posed by foreign flagged MODUs operating on the U.S. OCS. 
 
(1) The first three columns/entities of the matrix remain the same with minor changes 
made to terminology specific to MODUs. 
 
(2) These entities are: I) MODU Management (to include lease holder), II) Flag State and III) Recognized Organizations/ Classification Societies.  
 
(3) If any of these entities fail to fully undertake their responsibilities for the safe operation of an associated foreign flagged MODU, then that MODU, based on its final targeting matrix score, may be identified as requiring more stringent Coast Guard over sight. 
 
(4) Column IV takes into account the Coast Guard’s 12 month- cumulative experience 
with a particular MODU.  
 
(5) Finally, Column V applies points based on a MODUs propulsion type, design particulars, and or age.  Targeting points will be assigned in each of the five columns, and then totaled for the final point score. 
 
(6) A MODUs matrix point score will determine if it warrants additional oversight through more frequent Coast Guard examinations. 
 
 
3. PROCEDURES  
 
a. MODUs will be scored manually by each OCMI each time an Advanced Notice 
of Arrival (ANOA) is submitted on their behalf, which includes arrival on the U.S. 
OCS and movement between OCS blocks i n accordance 33 CFR 146.215.  The 
National 
 Vessel Movement Center (NVMC) will initially collect, review, and verify specific 
MODU information including MODU type and size, cargo, crew list, MODU 
management information, and security and safety compliance documentation, etc. 
The NVMC then makes the ANOA available to the National Maritime Intelligence -
Integration Office (NMIO ) and to the OCMI's through the Ship Arrival Notification 
System (SANS). The NVMC also makes the ANOA accessible through MISLE. The 
NMI O analyzes MODU owner, operator, charterer, crew composition, history, etc. to 
determine whether there is pertinent intelligence regarding the MODU.  The NMIO  
will then issue a daily message for Vessels of Intelligence Interest (VOII).  
 b. The OCMI will prioritize and coordinate the examination of MODUs entering their AOR. The OCMI will review each MODU arrival in MISLE paying close atten tion to 
the MODU matrix score. The calculated score may be raised or lowered based on amplifying information available and at the discretion of the OCMI. The MISLE vessel arrivals screen must also be updated to record a MODUs arriv al and departure 
from the AOR. After completing the above steps, the OCMI will create an inspection activity  in MISLE for each MODU  that requires an examination. A full tutorial on 
processing arrivals and scheduling exams for foreign vessel (same process for MODUs) arrivals can be accessed at http://mislenet.osc.uscg.mil/User_Guides/Tutorials/SchedForeignVsl_Arrvl.htm . 
 
############
 
4. MODU Safety and Environmental Protection Compliance Targeting Matrix Scoring  
 
a. Column I: Management. This column is based on Port State Control (PSC) or Comandant ( CG-CVC)  targeting. A targeted vessel management company includes 
any owner, operator, lessee, charterer, or managing operator whose vessels have been “detained ” (since MODUs outside 12 NM cannot  be “detained” this data will come 
from PSC detention information) or sustained major Coastal State control actions in the U.S. more than once within the previous 12 months under the provisions of an international Convention. (A major Coastal State control action would include non-issuance, revocation or suspension of a COC, SMS audit or based on a decision by Commandant ( CG-CVC) .  Commandant ( CG-CVC- 2) will maintain a current listing 
of targeted ship management companies  based on detention reports received from 
Coast Guard field units; this list is updated monthly. Commandant ( CG-CVC- 2) will 
remove a targeted management company once their vessels are associated with less than two detentions within a 12 month period.  
 
(1) If the owner, lessee, managing operator, or charterer of a MODU is included on 
the current Targeted Vessel Management Company List provided by Commandant ( CG-CVC- 2), assign 5 points. Although listed in the same column 
the owner, lessee, managing operator, a nd charterer should be scored separately.  
 (2) The OCMI may assign a maximum total of 5 points for this column. Proceed to 
Column II. 
 
b. Column II: Flag. A targeted Flag Administration is a country with a safety -related 
detention ratio exceeding the average safety detention ratio for all Flag Administration’s with vessels op erating in U.S. waters.  This data is based on PSC and 
Coastal State figures. 
 
(1) Commandant ( CG-CVC- 2) compiles a list consisting of targeted Flag 
Administrations on an annual basis for use with the PSC Safety and 
Environmental Protection Compliance Targeting Matrix . This list can be found 
on the Web, accessible at : http://www.uscg.mil/hq/cgcvc/cvc2/safety.asp 
 
(2) The OCMI assigns either 7 points or 2 points to vessels registered with a targeted Flag Administration in Column II of the PSC Safety and Environmental Protection Compliance Targeting Matrix . The list provi ded on the Web, lists the 
number of points applicable to the various targeted Flag Administrations.  This list is accessible at :
 http://www.uscg.mil/hq/cgcvc/cvc2/safety.asp 
 
c. Column III: Recognized Organization. Commandant ( CG-CVC- 2) evaluates 
Recognized Organizations (ROs) based on their performance over the previous three years ( based on PSC and Coastal State data) . 
 (1) If they have a 3- year safety detention ratio that exceeds the fixed 3 -year safety 
detention ratio (0.5%), then that Org anization will receive points.  
 (2) The Targeted Organization List contains the names of ROs that will receive points on the MODU Safety and Environmental Protection Compliance Targeting Matrix .  This list is accessible at 
http://homeport.uscg.mil/mycg/portal/ep/browse.do?channelId= -18371. Table 1 
below , shows the RO detention ratio and the matrix points that should be assigned 
based on PSC and Coastal state data collected.  
 (5) Check the vessel’s RO against the current targeted list.  If the list shows the RO as being targeted assign the appropriate number of points as indicated.  See http://homeport.uscg.mil/mycg/portal/ep/browse.do?channelId= -18371. 
 
############
d. Column IV: V essel History.  
 (1) If MISLE data indicates the Coast Guard  has not performed a COC exam in the 
past 12 months or the MODU has never been to the United States , then assign 
PRIORITY status. If the OCMI determines, after the initial exam and issuance of the COC, t hat the MODU meets all applicable safety requirements then they may  
       “downgrade” the MODU to Non- Priority, eliminating the six m onth examination 
requirement.  (See section 5, below, for more details on the six month exam.)  
 
(2) If MISLE data indicate s that the MODU has been the subject of an exam resulting 
in non- issuance of a COC within the past 12 months, assign 5 points for each 
occurrence. Commandant ( CG-CVC- 2) will enter an inspection note after 
reviewing reports received from field units. This n otice will assist in identifying 
MODUs not receiving their COC during the inspectors initial examination within 
the previous 12 months, but may not include very recent examinations .  Field 
units must check the MISLE Vessel Critical Profile to determine whe ther any 
recent exams resulting in non- issuance of a COC have occurred .  
 
(3) If MISLE data indicates that the MODU has been the subject of any other form of operational control within the past 12 months (i.e., COC suspension, COTP Order, Letter of Deviation, etc.), ass ign 1 point for each incident. Do not assign 
multiple points if the field unit took more than one control action for a single incident.  
 (4) If MISLE data indicates that the MODU has been involved in a reportable marine casualty or pollution case, as defined in 33 CFR 140.201, within the past 12 months , assign 1 point for each case.  
 (5) If MISLE data indicates that the MODU has been the subject of a marine violation, except for pollution, within the past 12 months, assign 1 point for each violation case.  
 (6) If MISLE data indicates the MODU has an outstanding deficiency which was not satisfactorily corrected by the required due date, assign 1 point each.  The total points in Column IV are unlimited. 
 
e. Column V: MODU Particulars.  For purposes of this matrix the following definitions 
and points apply. MODU details should be verified through Class or International documents and entered in vessel particulars in MISLE.  
 (1) Self-Propelled (propelled by mechanical means) – MODU has propuls ion 
machinery (including a Dynamic Positioning system) that provides for independent underway navigation.  Assign 5 points. 
 (2) Semi -Submersible – a column stabilized MODU designed for offshore operations; 
either afloat or supported by the sea bed.  Assign 3 points. 
 (3) Jack-Up (self -elevating unit) – a MODU with movable legs capable of raising its 
hull above the surface of the sea. The hull has sufficient buoyancy to transport the  
unit to the desired location. Once on location, the hull is raised to a pr edetermined  
       elevation above the sea surface on its legs, which  are supported by the sea bed. 
The legs of such units may be designed to penetrate the bed, may be fitted with 
enlarged sections or footings, or ma y be attached to a bottom mat. Assign 2 
points. 
 
############
(4) Submersible – a column stabilized MODU designed for offshore operations solely 
when supported by the sea bed.  Assign 1 point. 
 
(5) Age – delivery date of the MODU shall be used for age determination.  Assign 
the following points based on age: 0 -4 years (subtract 3 points), 5- 9 years 
(subtract 2 points), 10- 14 years (add 0 points), 15- 19 years (add 3 points), 20- 24 
years (add 5 points), and 25+ years (add 7 points).  
f. Total Targeting Mat rix Score/Priority Assignment.  
 
(1) 12 or more point s = Priority MODU  
 (2) 11 or fewer = Non- Priority MODU  
 
 
5. Targeting Decision and Examination Frequency  
 
The MODU Safety and Environmental Protection Compliance Targeting Matrix evaluates a vessel’s relative risk of non -compliance with maritime safety standards and results in the 
assignment of points.  Each matrix will provide a total that corresponds to the designations of Priority or Non -Priority.  
 OCMIs should consider placing Priority MODUs on a  6 month exam schedule and/ or 
increasing scope of regu lar COC exam as resources allow.  
 
 
 
6. Priority Downgrade Clause  
 
If a MODU has undergone a satisfactory annual exam within the past 6 months with no serious deficiencies, and all of the deficiencies issued during the exam have been corrected to the Coast Guard’s satisfaction, the OCMI may downgrade the MODU to Non- Priority.  If the 
exam priority of a MODU is downgraded to Non- Priority, it shall  be added to the unit’s pool 
of potential random examinations. 
  
 
7. Stacked MODUs 
 
Upon receiving notification, either through ANOA or otherwise, that a MODU will be or has 
been in a “stacked” condition, the OCMI will contact the owner/operator to advise them on the provisions contained in this  Manual, Section G, Chapter 3:  MODUs in layu p status and 
Drydock exam extensions  
 
 
8. Random Examinations  
 Units  will conduct additional random  examinations on 10% of their entire (priority and non-
priority) fleet. For example, if a unit has 25 foreign flag MODUs operating in their zone then they should aim for conducting an additional 2 - 3 MODU examinations ann ually as unit 
resources allow.  For information on how to document this type of activity in MISLE see 
MISLE Management System (MMS) Work Instruction – MISLE Data Entry Requirements for Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Inspections . 
 
 
9. Documentation of Foreign -Flagged MODU Exam Activities  
 
a. MISLE. A ll units conducting foreign- flagged MODU exams must use the MISLE 
MMS Work Instruction s, MISLE Data Entry Requirements for OCS Inspections  and 
MISLE D ata Entry Requirements for Foreign Vessel Arrivals, Examinations and 
Operational Controls to accurately document MODU exams/activities within MISLE. To enable the proper use of the MODU Safety and Environmental Protection Compliance Targeting Matrix, it is of paramount importance every unit responsible for conducting foreign- flagged MODUs accurately document all MODU exam 
information and enter this data in MISLE in accordance with this policy and the MMS Work Instruction – MISLE Data Entry Requirements for OCS Inspections . Of 
particular note -  units must enter all exam deficiencies, including those cleared on -
site, into the MISLE activity. Deficiency MISLE entry must include the applicable  
regulatory cite the deficiency is based on and the date for required correction, or date it was corrected if corrected on the spot.  
 b. Reports  of Inspection (Forms A and B).   For COC’s issued to a foreign vessel within 
U.S. territorial waters (inside 12 nm ), the process remains relatively unchanged. A 
valid COC form will be issued and the examination record section completed. The Coast Guard Marine Inspector (MI) or Port State Control Officer (PSCO) shall continue to issue a Port State Control Report of Inspection, Form A, documenting the examination and a Form B, detailing any discrepancies identified during the exam. If no deficiencies are identified, a Form B will not be issu ed and a simple statement of  
       no deficiencies issued will be entered in the examination record section. The 
deficiency report contained within the new COC form will not  be utilized during 
these exams (within 12 nm). Port State “control action” codes  (detention, prior to 
departure, etc.) located at the bottom of the Form B, remains the appropriate means to 
document actions taken for an examination conducted inside U.S. territorial waters (within 12 nm).    
c. Certifictae of Compliance, Form CG- 3585. For COC’s issued to a foreign vessel 
beyond U.S. territorial waters (outside 12 nm), the Coast Guard MI/PSCO shall issue a valid COC form, complete the examination record section and utilize the deficiency report for deficiencies identified in lieu of the U.S. Coast Guard Port State Control Report of Inspection Form A, Form  CG- 5437A and U.S. Coast Guard Port State 
Control Report of Inspection Form B, Form CG- 5437B. To clarify, the deficiency 
report shall be used to document deficiencies identified during CO C exams occurring 
overseas, in lightering zones, and on the OCS (exams occurring outside 12 nm). The 
deficiency report is very similar to the U.S. Coast Guard Port State Control Report of 
Inspection Form B, Form CG- 5437B and instructions for its use are located on the 
“Instructions/Notices” page of the updated COC form. If no deficiencies are 
identified, the deficiency report will not be utilized and a simple statement of “no 
deficiencies issued” will be entered in the examination record section. Additional ly, 
due to the unique nature of MODUs and FI’s, three new “Action Codes” have been added to the Deficiency Report (which is not included on the U.S. Coast Guard Port 
State Control Report of Inspection Form B, Form CG- 5437B ): Code 66 -  Rectify 
deficiency pr ior to drilling operations (issue to units who have not yet commenced 
drilling ops), Code 67 -  Rectify deficiency prior to continuing drilling operations 
(issued to units who have had to cease drilling ops in order to rectify defs), and Code 
34 - Operation s Restricted. The Coast Guard does not have the authority to invoke an 
IMO detention on a vessel outside 12 nm. Therefore, other operational controls may be utilized under existing COTP authority which may include not issuing, suspending 
or invalidating th e COC.  
 
############
d. Issuance of COC.  Once the Marine Inspector determines the foreign -flagged MODU 
is fit for its intended service, a Certificate of Compliance , Form CG -3585, will be 
issued.  The MODU particulars must be indicated in the applicable section on the form. 
 e. Endorsement  of COC. During the foreign- flagged MODUs required annual exam, 
once the Marine Inspector determines the unit to be fit for its intended service, the Certificate of Compliance , Form CG -3585, will be dated and endorsed with the 
attending Marine Inspector’s signature in the appropriate block on page 1 of the form. 
 f. Non-issuance/revocation  of a Certifictae of Compliance, Form CG- 3585. Coast 
Guard units will notify Commandant ( CG-CVC- 2) via email ( CGCVC@uscg.mil ) 
when it is determined that a foreign -flagged MODU does not or no longer meet s the  
        applicable safety requirements warranting issuance of a Certifictae of Compliance, 
Form CG- 3585, either during the required annual exam or deficiency check, etc .  
Commandant ( CG-CVC- 2) will enter a special note in MISLE regarding the specific 
deficiencies identified during the exam, and the reason for non- issuance or revocation 
of the COC.  This spec ial note will remain “active” and be reflected on the MODUs 
critical profile for a period of five years.  The e mail to Commandant ( CG-CVC- 2) 
should include, at a minimum, name of MODU, official number or IMO number, and 
MISLE activity number. Units should also scan the Certifictae of Compliance, Form 
CG-3585 and deficiency report forms into  MIS LE and attach them to the activity.  
 
g. Access Control and Closure of Activities.  A 2011 Office of the Inspector General 
(OIG) audit revealed that MISLE lacks sufficient internal controls to ensure accuracy  
and validity of data entered. To address this issue, Chiefs of the Inspection Division (CID) will review each activity for accuracy and compliance with Commandant, 
District and local unit administrative polic ies. Following appropriate review, CID’s  
(or their representative) may close each activity.  
 
h. Continuous  Improvement . Industry members and OCMIs are encouraged to provide 
suggestions and feedback on MODU risked -based targeting  via email to 
CGCVC@uscg.mil . 
 10. MODU Matrix  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
                    
 
 
Priority MODU  
12 or more points on the Matrix; MODUs involved in a marine 
casualty that may have affected seaworthiness; Coast Guard  Officer 
in Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI) determines a MODU to be a 
potential hazard to the OCS, port or the environment; MODUs 
whose Recognized Organization (classification society) has a 
detention ratio equal to or greater than 2%.  Port or OCS entry may 
be restricted until the Coast Guard examines the MODU.  Non-Priority MODU  
11 or fewer points on the Matrix.  MODU poses 
a low safety and environmental risk.  The Coast 
Guard may select and examine MODU using a 
random selection process.  Downgrade Clause .  If a MODU has undergone a Coast Guard Certificate of Compliance (COC) or a required COC annual 
exam within the past 6 months with no serious deficiencies, the OCMI may downgrade the MODU to non- priority.   If the 
OCMI downgrades a MODU exam priori ty, it will be added to the pool of random examinations.  
 O. CROSS REFERENCE OF REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO U.S. AND 
FOREIGN FLAG MO DUS  
 
############
The following is a cross reference guide of regulations pertaining to U.S. and foreign 
documented units.  Unless otherwise indicated, all U.S. cites reference Title 46 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), and all International cites reference applicab le sections of 
the IMO MODU Code.  
 
The * indicates no equivalent standard.  
 
Item  U.S.                                          
(46 CFR XXX)  79 MODU 
CODE  89 MODU 
CODE  2009 
MODU 
CODE  SOLAS 74, 
2009 consol'd 
ed.          
HULL STRUCTURE            
Hull Structure/ watertight 
integrity  108.113 - 
.115  2.3 - 2.6, 
3.6 2.3 - 2.6, 3.6 2.4 - 2.7, 
3.6   
STRUCTURAL FIRE 
PROTECTION           
  
Structural Fire protection  108.123 - 
.147 9.1 - 9.2 9.1 - 9.2 9.1 - 9.3 
  
MEANS OF ESCAPE            
Means of Escape  108.151 - 
.167 9.3 9.3 9.4 Chapter II -2,      
Reg 13  
Additional means of 
abandonment  108.540 10.11.1.2 10.3.8 10.4.8 
  
Stairways and ladders  108.159 - 
.160 * * * 
  
Means of embarkation for lifeboat/life raft 108.540 10.1.3;                 
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., 
Chapter III, 
Reg 48  10.1.3;                 
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., Chapter 
III, Reg 48  10.4.7                                              SOLAS 74,         
Chapter III, 
Reg 11  
CLASSIFIED LOCATIONS             
Hazardous Locations  108.170 - 
.177 111.105 6.1 - 6.7 6.1 - 6.7 6.1 - 6.7 
  
VENTILATION            
Ventilation system  61.20 -3,           
111.103  6.3 - 6.4  6.3 - 6.4  6.3 - 6.4 
  
ACCOMODATION SPACES            
Accommodation spaces  108.193 - 
.215  * * *   
 Accommodation spaces 
inspected  109.433 * * *   
Hospital space  108.209 * * *   
RAILS            
Rails and guards 58.01- 20,            
108.217 - 
.223 10.10 * * Loadlines 
2005 ed. 
Annex I, Reg 
25 (2)  
HELICOPTER FACILITIES            
Heliport 108.231 - 
.241 13.1 - 13.3 13.1 - 13.4 13.1 - 
13.5   
Visual Aids 108.241 13.4 13.5 13.5 
  
Heliport fueling  108.237 - 
.239  9.11 9.11 9.16   
Markings  108.653 13.4 13.5 13.5   
FIRE EXTINGUISHING 
SYSTEMS            
Fire detection systems  108.404 - 
.413 9.7 9.7 9.10   
Fire main system and stations  108.419 - 
.427 9.4;                        
SOLAS 74         
Chapter II -
2, Reg 4  9.4;                         
SOLAS 74         
Chapter II -2, 
Reg 4  9.7 SOLAS 74              
Chapter II -2, 
Reg 10.2 - .3   
Fixed extinguishing system  108.431 9.5;                              
SOLAS 74         
Chapter II -
2, Reg 5  9.5;                              
SOLAS 74         
Chapter II -2, 
Reg 5  9.8  SOLAS 74              
Chapter II -2, 
Reg 10.4 - .5     
Pressure relief system for 
air/vapor type space with 
fixed CO2 system  108.457 * * *   
Closures for spaces protected by fixed  fire 
protection  108.455 9.10.1 9.10.1 9.15.1   
extinguishers  108.491 - 
.496  * * *   
Portable extinguishers  108.491 - 
.495 9.6;                           
SOLAS 74              
Chapter II -
2, Reg 6  9.6;                           
SOLAS 74              
Chapter II -2, 
Reg 6  9.9   
Firemen’s outfits  108.497 9.9;                            
SOLAS 74           
Chapter II -
2, Reg 17  9.9;                            
SOLAS 74           
Chapter II -2, 
Reg 17  9.13   
Fire axes  108.499 * * *   
LIFESAVING EQUIPMENT             
 Lifeboats  108.520, 
108.525 10.1.3;                 
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., 
Chapter III, 
Reg 44, 45, 
and 46  10.1.3;                 
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., Chapter 
III, Reg 44, 
45, and 46 10.3 SOLAS 74            
Chapter III,             
Reg 4 and 5 
Lifeboat equipment  108.575                   
Table 
108.575 (b), 
109.301 (f)  10.1.3;                 
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., 
Chapter III, 
Reg 41  10.1.3;                 
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., Chapter 
III, Reg 41  10.18.8 SOLAS 74 
Chapter III, 
Reg 34;                       
LSA Code 
Chapter IV,  
4.4.8  
Lifeboat davit assembly  108.550 - 
.557, 
109.301 (f)  10.1.3;                 
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., 
Chapter III, 
Reg 48  10.1.3;                 
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., Chapter 
III, Reg 48  10.7 SOLAS 74 
Chapter III, 
Reg 16  
Lifeboat winches  108.550,    
109.301(f),       
111.95 SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., 
Chapter III, 
Reg 48  SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., Chapter 
III, Reg 48  10.7 SOLAS 74 
Chapter III, 
Reg 16  
Lifeboat falls  108.553,        
109.301(j)  10.5;                     
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., 
Chapter III, 
Reg 48  10.5;                     
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., Chapter 
III, Reg 48  10.6 SOLAS 74 
Chapter III, 
Reg 16 and 
Reg 20.4 
Lifeboat launching system  108.555 - 
.557 10.5;                     
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., 
Chapter III, 
Reg 48  10.6;                     
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., Chapter 
III, Reg 48  10.7 SOLAS 74 
Chapter III, 
Reg 16  
Inflatable life rafts  108.520,            
108.525 10.1;                     
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., 
Chapter III, 
Reg 39  10.2;                     
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., Chapter 
III, Reg 39  10.3 SOLAS 74 
Chapter III, 
Reg 8 and 31 
Inflatable life raft 
launching system  108.530,             
108.550 - 
.553 10.5;                     
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., 
Chapter III, 
Reg 48  10.6;                     
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., Chapter 
III, Reg 48  10.7 SOLAS 74 
Chapter III, 
Reg 16  
  10.5;          10.4 and 
SOLAS 74,     10.5;            SOLAS 74 Arrangements of lifeboats 108.525,        97 consol. SOLAS 74,       10.5 and Chapter III, and life rafts  108.530 ed., 97 consol. 10.6 Reg 11  Chapter III, ed., Chapter 
Reg 28  III, Reg 28  
10.11;        10.3;            SOLAS 74,     SOLAS 74,       SOLAS 74 97 consol. Means of embarkation  108.540 97 consol. 10.4 Chapter III, ed., ed., Chapter Reg 11  Chapter III, III, Reg 48  Reg 48  
Life floats  NVIC 4 -78 * * * * 
SOLAS 74,     10.11;          
108.580(c);      97 consol. SOLAS 74,       SOLAS 74 
Immersion Suits  33 CFR ed., 97 consol. 10.12 Chapter III, 
140.20-5 Chapter III, ed., Chapter Reg 7.3  
Reg 33  III, Reg 33  
10.3;          10.10;          SOLAS 74,     SOLAS 74,       SOLAS 74 97 consol. Lifejackets 108.580(b)  97 consol. 10.11 Chapter III, ed., ed., Chapter Reg 7.2  Chapter III, III, Reg 32  Reg 32  
10.4;          10.12;          SOLAS 74,     SOLAS 74,       SOLAS 74 97 consol. Ring life buoys  108.580(a)  97 consol. 10.13 Chapter III, ed., ed., Chapter Reg 7.1  Chapter III, III, Reg 31  Reg 31  
10.2;          10.7, 10.8, 
SOLAS 74,     and 10.9;       SOLAS 74       NVIC 4 -78;       10.8, 97 consol. SOLAS 74,       Chapt er III, Rescue boat 108.560 - 10.9, and ed., 97 consol. Reg 14, 17, .575 10.10 Chapter III, ed., Chapter and 31 
Reg 47  III, Reg 47  
10.8;          10.14;          SOLAS 74,     SOLAS 74,       97 consol. SOLAS 74 97 consol. Distress signals 108.595(b)  ed., 10.15 Chapter III, ed., Chapter Chapter III, Reg 6.3  III, Reg  35, Reg 35, 36 36 and 37 and 37 
11.4.1.4 SOLAS 74 11.4.2.2 and and 11.5;     Chapter III, 11.5.1;         SOLAS 74,     11.4.2.2 Reg 7.1.6 SOLAS 74,       EPIRB  108.650 97 consol. and 97 consol. ed., 11.5.1 ed., Chapter Chapter IV, IV, Reg 7.1.6 Reg 7.1.6            

############

10.7;          10.13;          SOLAS 74,     108.595 (a);    SOLAS 74,       SOLAS 74 97 consol. Portable emergency radio  47 CFR 97 consol. 10.14 Chapter III, ed., 80.1095 ed., Chapter Reg 6.2  Chapter III, III, Reg 6.2  Reg 6.2  
10.7;          10.13;          SOLAS 74,     108.595 (a);    SOLAS 74,       SOLAS 74 Portable emergency radio 97 consol. 47 CFR 97 consol. 10.14 Chapter III, stowage location  ed., 80.1095 ed., Chapter Reg 6.2  Chapter III, III, Reg 6.2  Reg 6.2  
SOLAS 74,     10.15;          SOLAS 74 
97 consol. SOLAS 74,       Chapter III, 
Line throwing appliance  108.597 ed., 97 consol. 10.16 Reg 18;         
Chapter III, ed., Chapter LSA Code    
Reg 17  III, Reg 17  Chapter 7.1 
CRANES           
Cranes  108.601 12.1 12.1 12.1   
Cranes 107.258 - 12.1 12.1 12.1 examined/approved .259   
MARKINGS AND 
INSTRUCTIONS            
67.120 - 
.123;      Unit Markings  * * *   108.661 - 
.663 
3.7;          3.7;            1966 Load 108.661 - 1966 Load 1966 Load Line Load line and draft marks  .663;  42.07- Line Line 3.7 Convention,    5 Convention Convention,    Article 3  ,    Article 3  Article 3  
Heliport markings  108.241 13.4.2 13.5 13.5   
Portable extinguisher 108.637 * * *   markings  
Location of self-contained 108.635 * * *   breathing apparatus 
General alarm switch and 108.623 - * * *   bells marked  .625 
Lifeboat markings  10.1.4;         SOLAS 74 10.2;            SOLAS 74,     Chapter III, SOLAS 74,       97 consol. Reg 34;          108.645 97 consol. 10.3 ed., LSA Code ed., Chapter Chapter III, Chapter IV,  III, Reg 41.9  Reg 41.9 4.4.9 


10.1.4;         SOLAS 74 10.2;            SOLAS 74,     Chapter III, SOLAS 74,       Inflatable life raft 97 consol. Reg 34;          108.647 97 consol. 10.3 markings  ed., LSA Code ed., Chapter Chapter III, Chapter IV,  III, Reg 39.8  Reg 39.8 4.2.7  
Ring buoy markings  108.649 10.4 10.12.4 10.13.4   
Inflatable life raft 108.655 * 10.17 10.17 launching instructions 
 Watertight doors marked 
Inflatable life raft 108.665 3.6.3.2.1 3.6.5.1 3.6.6   launching instructions 
"Keep Closed"  
MISCELLANEOUS            
108.636,        
Buoyant work vest  109.335,        * * *   
160.053 
9.4.5;         9.4.22;         SOLAS 74,     SOLAS 74,       SOLAS 74 International shore 97 consol. 108.427 97 consol. 9.7.23 Chapter II -2, connection  ed., ed., Chapter Reg 10 -2.1.7 Chapter III, III, Reg 19  Reg 19  
First aid kit 108.707 10.9 * *   
Obstruction lights 33 CFR 67 14.7.2 14.7.2 14.8.2   
Fog signal  33 CFR 67 14.7.2 14.7.2 14.8.2   
Litter capable of being 108.709 10.9 * *   used in helo  
SOLAS 74,     SOLAS 74,       SOLAS 74,       97 consol. 97 consol. 97 consol. ed., Signal light 111.75-18 ed.,   ed., Chapter Chapter V, Chapter V, V, Reg 11  Reg 19.2.2.2 Reg 11  
LSA Code 113.25,        9.7.2,          10.16,         General Alarms  10.18.7.4 Chapter IV,  109.201 10.6.4 10.18.6.3 7.2 
Hot work  109.573 * * *   
108.715,        Illuminated magnetic 33 CFR * * * steering compass  164.35   
Magnetic compass 33 CFR * * * deviation card  164.35   
109.564,          Maneuvering information 33 CFR * * * fact sheet 164.35 


109.565,        
Navigation publications   33 CFR * * * 
164.35   
108.701,        
Sounding equipment  33 CFR * * * 
164.35    
Navigation light indicator 111.75-17 (b)  * * * panel    
SOLAS 
SOLAS 74,     74,          SOLAS 74,       97 consol. 97 International code of 97 consol. 108.713 ed., consol. signals ed., Chapter Chapter V, ed., V, Reg 21  Reg 21  Chapter 
V, Reg 21    
MAIN PROPULSION 
MACHINERY           
58.05,          4.1 - 4.7,      4.1 - 4.7,       4.1 - 4.8,    Propulsion machinery    111.35 7.1 - 7.4 7.1 - 7.4 7.1 - 7.4 
Propulsion and auxiliary 4.1 - 4.5,      4.1 - 4.5,       4.1 - 4.6,    Part 52   boilers 7.1 - 7.4 7.1 - 7.4 7.1 - 7.4 
56.50-65,        Boiler fuel systems  4.7 4.7 4.8   58.01-15 
High pressure steam 56.50-15,        4.4 4.4 4.5   piping  61.15-5 
4.1, 4.3,     4.1, 4.2,       4.1, 4.2,         Diesels 58.10-10 4.7 and   4.6 and 7.4 4.6 and 7.4 7.4 
Diesel fuel system  56.50-75 4.7 4.7 4.8   
AUXILLARY MACHINERY            
Low pressure heating 4.2.4,          4.2.4,          4.3.4,      Part 53    boilers 4.3 4.3 4.4 
58.25,          7.5, 7.6,       7.5, 7.6,         7.5, 7.6,     Steering gear system    111.93 7.10.3 7.10.3 7.10.3 
54.01-10,        Evaporators  * * * 54.15-15   
Deck machinery  108.705 * * *   
56.50- 50 - 4.8, 4.9,         4.9, 4.10,   Bilge and ballast systems 92,          33 4.8, 8.3 8.3 8.3  CFR 15   
Lubrication systems 56.50-80 4.7.2 4.7.2 4.8.2   
Fresh water system 61.10-5 * * *   
 Refrigeration and air 
conditioning  58.2 * * * 
  
############
Sanitary system  61.10- 5,                       
33 CFR 155 * * * 
  
Air receivers  61.10- 5 4.6 4.6 4.7   
Bulk tanks Part 54,             
61.10.5 * * * 
  
Other  pressure vessels  Part 54,                
61.10- 5 * * * 
  
Tensioner bottles  Part 54,               
61.10- 5 * * * 
  
Industrial systems 58.60,               
111.107 6.7,                                 
8.10 6.7,                               
8.2.3 6.7,                              
8.2.3   
Mud pumps 58.6 6.7,                              
8.10 6.7,                             
8.2.3 6.7,                               
8.2.3   
Elevators  111.91 12.2 12.2 12.3   
ELECT RICAL 
INSTALLATIONS            
General electrical 
installations  Part 111  5.1 5.1 5.1   
Service generators  111.12 5.1 - 5.2, 
and 5.5, 
7.9, 8.7.2  5.1 - 5.2, and 
5.5,        7.9, 
8.7.2  5.1 - 5.3 
and 5.6,    
7.9, 8.7.2    
Emergency generator  112.5 5.3 - 5.4 5.3 - 5.4     
Emergency batteries  112.55 5.3,                                 
7.10 5.3,                             
7.10 5.4,                              
7.10   
Service power and lighting  111.75 5.2.2, 5.5.5             
and 5.5.7 5.2.4,                            
5.5 5.3.4,                          
5.6   
Emergency power and 
lighting  Part 112  5.3 - 5.4,                   
7.10 5.3.6,                             
7.10 5.4.6,                           
7.10   
Lifeboat station emergency lighting  111.75- 16 5.3.2;                     
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., 
Chapter III, 
Reg 11  5.3.6;                     
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., Chapter 
III, Reg 11  5.4.6;                       Chapter III, 
Reg 11  
Inflatable life raft station 
emergency lighting  111.75- 16 5.3.2;                     
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., 
Chapter III, 
Reg 11  5.3.6;                     
SOLAS 74,                   
97 consol. 
ed., Chapter 
III, Reg 11  5.4.6;                      Chapter I II, 
Reg 11  
Switch boards  111.30 5.5.2, 5.3.1,           
5.3.5 and 
8.7.2  5.3.11, 
5.3.13,             
5.5.5 and 5.4.11, 
5.4.13,         
5.6.5,    


5.5.6  5.6.6  
Motor controllers  111.70 5.5 5.5 5.6   
4.6, 5.7, 4.5, 5.6, Internal communications 4.5, 5.6, 7.4,    7.4,         113.30 7.4,             and control systems  8.5 and 8.6 8.5. and 8.4 and 8.5  8.6 
DIVING SYSTEM 
INSTALLATIONS            
Diving supervisor 197.210 14.6 14.6 14.7   designated 
Person in charge of diving 197.208,        14.6 14.6 14.7 operations designated 197.402   
Diving operations manual  197.420 14.6 14.6 14.7   
Diving air compressors  197.310 14.6 14.6 14.7   
197.340,        Diving breathing supply  14.6 14.6 14.7   197.450 
Surfaced supplied air  197.432 14.6 14.6 14.7   
Surface supplied mixed 197.434 14.6 14.6 14.7 gases    
PVHO's (pressure vessel 197.328 - 14.6 14.6 14.7   for human occupancy)  .334 
Diving helmets  197.322 14.6 14.6 14.7   
Diving hoses  197.312 14.6 14.6 14.7   
Diving harness  197.324 14.6 14.6 14.7   
Diving depth gauge and 197.318 14.6 14.6 14.7 time keeping device   
Diving ladders and stages 197.320 14.6 14.6 14.7 
  
Diving logbook  197.482 14.6 14.6 14.7   
Diving first aid equipment  197.314 14.6 14.6 14.7   
SCUBA operations  197.430 14.6 14.6 14.7   
TEST, DRILLS AND 
INSPECTIONS            
109.213(c) & 
Boat drill  (d), 109.431- 10.6.3 14.11.1 14.12   
.433 
Fire drill 109.213(f)  10.6.3 14.11.1 14.12   
Lifeboat operated in water  109.213(d)  10.6.3.3 14.11.5 14.12.5   


10.5;          14.11.5;         SOLAS 74,     SOLAS 74,       Lifeboat disengaging 97 consol. 109.213(d)  97 consol. 14.12.5 apparatus tested ed., ed., Chapter Chapter III, III, Reg 18  Reg 18    
Lifeboat fuel changed 109.301 * * *   annually  
Lifeboat stripped and 109.301 10.6.3.3 10.18 10.18   inspected 
Lifeboat winch tested  109.301 10.6.3.3 10.18 10.18   
LSA Code 109.301(d)(3General alarm tested  * 10.18.6.3 10.18.7.4 Chapter IV,  ) 7.2 
109.201,        
Steering gear tested 33 CFR * * *   
164.25 
Immersion suits worn 109.213(d)(7* * *   during drills  ) 
EPIRB tested  109.301 * * *   
Emergency generator 109.211,        5.3.7 5.3.16 5.4.16   tested 109.213 
Emergency batteries 109.211,        5.3.7 5.3.16 5.4.16 tested 109.213   
REPORTS, CERTIFICATES 
AND RECORDS           
1.6, 9.6;        1.6, 9.6;        SOLAS 74,     Record of servicing of fire SOLAS 74,       109.223,        97 consol. 1.6, Chapter II -2, extinguisher equipment 97 consol. 109.435 ed., 9.19.4 Reg 14  and systems ed., Chapter Chapter I, I, Reg 7  Reg 7  
1.6;          1.6;            SOLAS 74,     SOLAS 74,       Record of servicing of 97 consol. 1.6, 109.301(f)(1)  97 consol. inflatable life rafts  ed., 10.1.4;  ed., Chapter Chapter I, I, Reg 7  Reg 7    
Person in charge 109.107;       10.6.1 14.8 14.9   designation 33 CFR 146.5 
Citizenship requirements  33 CFR 141 * * *   
14.8.10 - 14.9.10 - Station bill 108.901 10.6.2   14.8.16  14.9.16  
Operations manual  109.121 14.1 14.1 14.1   
Construction portfolio 107.305(hh)  2.8 2.9 2.13   

############

9.13.1,        9.13.1,          14.1.2.13;      14.1.2.13;      SOLAS 74,     SOLAS 74,       9.18,       Chapter II -2, Fire control plan  107.305(v)  97 consol. 97 consol. 14.1.4 Reg  15.2.4 ed., ed., Chapter Chapter II -II-2, Reg  20 2, Reg 20  
Classified location plan  110.25-1(k) 14.1.2.12 14.1.2.15 14.1.2.15   
Crane operator 109.527 * * *   designation 
Crane record book  109.437 12.1.4 12.1.6 12.1.6   
Crane certificates  109.439 12.1.4 12.1.6 12.1.6   
Logbook  109.431-.433 * * *   
Emergency Evacuation 33 CFR * * *   Plan  146.210 
Shipboard Oil Pollution 33 CFR * * *   Emergency Plan (SOPEP)  151.29 


 
                                                                    G4  - 1                                                                  CH -2  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
A. Introduction          G4-2 
 
B. Plans            G4-2 
 
C. Standards           G4-2 
 D. Drydock  Exam  Requirements        G4-3 
 
E. Exemptions Under 33 CFR Subchapter N
 1. Personnel – Quarters Habitable       G4-4 
2. Control of Hydrocarbon Flow – “Buy Back Gas”               G4 -6  
 
F. Additional Requirements for S towage of O il in Bulk    G4-7 
 
G. Conversions           G4-8 
 H. Guardrails           G4-8 
 
I. Helicopter Facilities          G4-9 
 
J. Hose R eels With N on-Collapsible Hard-Rubber F ire Hoses   G4-9 
 
K. In Service Inspection Plans (ISIP)        G4-10 
1. Introduction          G4-10 
2. Approval          G4-11 
3. The Plan          G4-11 
4. The Inspec tion Process        G4-12 
5. Facilities 15 Years of Age and Older       G4-15 
6. Survey Procedures         G4-15 
7. In Service Inspection program (ISIP) Plan – Organization    G4-16 
 
L. Manning of Non -self propelled Floating Outer Contine ntal Shelf (OCS)          G4 -19 
            Facilties   
 1.  Purpose          G4-19 
 2. Manning          G4-19  
                                                              G4 -  2                                                           A. INTRODUCTION  
 
The term floating OCS facility means a buoyant OCS facility securely and substantially 
moored so that it cannot be moved without special effort. This term includes, but is not limited to tension leg platforms (TLP’s), SPARs, and permanently moored 
semisubm ersibles or shipshaped hulls such as floating production systems (FPS), floating 
production storage and offloading systems (FPSO), floating storage and offloading systems 
(FSO), and tanker conversions. The term floating OCS facility does not include mobile  
offshore drilling units (MODUs) and other vessels.  
 The a uthority to inspect all facilities on the O CS comes from the Outer Continental Lands Act 
(OCSLA), 43 U.S.C. 1333 (d) (1), 1348 (c) and 1356. The i nspection and examination of these 
facilities  is covered in the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) OCS -04 between the Minerals 
Management Service (MMS) , now referred  to as the Bureau of Safety and Environmental 
Enforcement (BSEE),  and the Coast Guard , dated 28 February 2008, (still current, but under 
revision ))to determine system jurisdiction and the application of appropriate inspection 
regulations, both during construct ion and following installation. On October 1, 2011, the Bureau 
of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE), formerly the Mi nerals 
Management Service (MMS), was replaced by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) and BSEE as part of a major reorganization .   
 Before construction is  started on a proposed  OCS facility of novel design or contains unusual 
equipment, the owner or operator must submit to Commandant (CG -ENG) for revie w plans and 
information for approval and issuance of  design basis agreement . See Chapter 1.C. 
Examination/Inspection Teams, for more information on conducting overseas 
exams/inspections.  
 
############
  
B. PLANS  
 
The owner/operator of each floating facility must submit plans to the Coast Guard for approval  
in accordance with 46 CFR 107, Subpart C , as related to the facility . If construction of the 
facility  is initiated prior to Coast Gua rd plan review and approval, discrepancies may require 
correction prior to placing the facility in operation.  
 
 
C. STANDARDS  
 
Each OCS floating facility must  comply with following requirements:  
 
 1. 46 CFR Subchapter F, Marine Engineering.  
 2. 46 CFR Subchapter  J, Electrical Engineering.   


 
                                                                    G4  - 3                                                                  CH -2  
3. 46 CFR Subchapter I -A, Part 107, Subpart C Plan Review . 
 4. 46 CFR Subchapter I -A, Part 108, Design and Equipment.  
 5. 33 CFR Part 67, Aids to Navigation on Artificial Islands and Fixed Structures.  
 6. 33 CFR Subchapter O, Pollution.  
 7. 33 CFR Subchapter N, Outer Continental Shelf Activities.  
 
Once a facility  meets the requirements found in this section, the cognizant OCMI will issue a 
Certificate of Inspection (COI ) or a Certificate of Compliance (COC) to the facility depe nding on 
the documenting nation.  
 As an alternative, units may meet the alternative design and equipment standards for FOI and 
FPSO units on the U.S. OCS outlined in CG- ENG Policy Letter No. 01- 13 dated 26 June 2013.  
The Coast Guard has determined that the standards in this letter provide a level of safety comparable to or greater than required by 33 CFR 140.120(b). 
 
 
D. DRYDOCK  EXAM REQUIREMENTS  
 
Each floating OCS facility must undergo a satisfactory drydock examination in the presence of a 
Coast Guard marine inspector prior to initial certification. Thereafter, the facility  must be 
examined to the satisfaction of the cognizant OCMI, in accor dance with its drydocking plan.  
 
 
1. Except as provided in paragraphs below , each floating facility  must undergo an 
examination, at least t wice within any 5- year period. No more than 3 years may elaps e 
between any two examinations.  
 2. The owner or operator of a  floating facility  may request to the cognizant OCMI,  to have 
an In Service Inspection Plan (ISIP) or an underwater survey in lieu of drydock (UWILD) 
instead of alternative drydock examinations . 
 3. The OCMI is responsible for administering and enforcing the drydock requirements 
applicable to the facility  within his or her jurisdiction.  In carrying out these 
responsibilities, the OCMI may delegate this authority to a classification society which is 
authorized to conduct inspections for a floating facility on behalf the Coast Guard per 46 CFR Part 8 . The Coast Guard must be present for a minimum  of 10% of these 
examinations. 
E. Exemptions Under 33 CFR Subchapter N   
 
1. Personnel –  Quarters Habitable  
 
a. Purpose  
As a Floating OCS Facility transits to be placed “on location”, but before it can produce or bring buy back gas on board, there may be a need for 
employees to live and work on the unit for a period of time.  In accordance 
with 33 CFR 140.5, the OCMI is aut horized to exempt a unit under 
construction from any requirement of Subchapter N that would be 
impracticable or unreasonable to apply during construction or erection. The OCMI shall issue a “Quarters Habitable” letter to the Floating OCS Facility 
prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Inspection (COI), in the interim.  This 
letter allows a limited number of personnel onboard and stipulates lifesaving and manning requirements applicable only until the unit receives the permanent COI.   
 A Temporary Certif icate of Inspection, Form CG-854, should NOT be issued 
(see Marine S afety M anual  Volume II, COMDTINST 16000.7 (series), 
Section A: Marine Inspection Administration, Chapter 3.I.) because the unit 
has not satisfactorily completed a full inspection for certification.  
Additionally, a temporary COI carries all the force and effect of a full term COI which permits all operations, for which this unit is not ready for.  
 
############
 
b. Example of Quarters Habitable Letter  
 QUARTERS HABITABLE APPROVAL, INSERT NAME OF UNIT HERE, INSERT BLOCK LOCATION HERE  
 
Mr. / Mrs. Smith,  
 
A Quarters Habitable inspection was completed on (Insert Date Here), at the request of (Insert Company Here).  The inspection concluded that all of the requirements for Quarters 
Habitable based on current practices and guidance have been satisfactorily completed. 
Quarters Habitability for (Insert Unit Name Here), (Insert CG Number Here), is hereby 
“Granted”. This approval is subject to the following comments:  
QUARTERS HABITABLE MANNING/LIFESAVING REQUIREMENTS:  
 This unit is a (insert type here: Floating Production System, Floating Production Storage Offloading unit, etc.) of the (SPAR, SEMISUBMERSBILE , TLP design), and is considered a 
Floating Offshore Installation with a (active/passive ballast system), inspected and constructed to the requirements of 46 CFR Parts 107 and 108, as directed by 33 CFR 143.120.  


 
                                                                    G4  - 5                                                                  CH -2 The maximum persons onboard shall not exceed the limitations approved in the (insert Unit 
Name Here) Emergency Evacuation Plan, (Insert sections applicable in plan here: ex. 
Supplement D, Quarters Habitable to Flotel demobilization).  
 
Maximum persons allowed onboard for more than 12 hours in any tw enty four (24) hours 
period and to be berthed onboard is not to exceed (ex. sixty eight (68)).  This is based upon 
the total number of berths consisting of (ex. forty four (44)) available in the permanent 
quarters and (ex. twenty four (24)) available in th e portable quarters.  
 
The following manning shall be maintained onboard:  
One (1) – OIM (Offshore Installation Manager)  
One (1) – BS (Barge Supervisor)  
Two (2) – BCO (Ballast Control Operator) (if applicable)  
Two (2) – AB (Able Seaman)  
One (1) - OS (Ordinary Seaman)  
XXX (X) – LB (Lifeboatman) As per 46 CFR 109.323 
 
A trained “firefighting specialist” holding a course completion certificate from an approved 
firefighting and first aid course meeting the requirements of 46 CFR 10.205(g)and 46 CFR 
10.205 (h) respectively, may be substituted for the required Able or Ordinary Seaman  
 
The required number of persons in charge of survival craft may be filled by deck officers 
(Offshore Installation Managers, Barge Supervisors and Ballast Control Operators), Able  
Seaman or Certificated Persons.  
 
There must be enough lifejackets for each person on board. In addition, a sufficient number 
of lifejackets must be carried for persons at each workstation or industrial work site.  
This exemption permits this OCS facility t o continue construction, but not engage in any 
activity associated with the exploration for, or development or production of the minerals of the Outer Continental Shelf.  
 
Should you have any questions or concerns, please contact (insert POC here).  
Upon rec eipt of the Certificate of Inspection (COI), this letter will no longer 
remain valid and all requirements will be based on the COI.  
 
c. Standards  
 
The maximum number of persons allowed on board for more than 12 hours 
in any 24 hour period, should not exceed t he completed berthing onboard 
and available lifesaving (should the floatel (if utilized as part of the lifesaving) move away due to weather).   
 
############
Manning requirements are derived from D8 Policy Letter 03 -00. 
 
d. Distribution  
 
The original copy of the Quarters Habitable letter should be issued directly to the operator of the unit; one copy should be electronically scanned and 
                                                              G4 -  6                                                           added to “documents” in MISLE. Additional copies may be obtained by the 
master, operator, owner, or agen t of the unit upon written request to the 
OCMI.  
 
2. Control of Hydrocarbon Flow – “Buy Back Gas”  
 
a.  Purpose  
 
During the construction phase of a Floating OCS Facility, but prior to full production capability, a company may request to the local OCMI, to be issued an approval letter to be allowed to flow buy -back gas onboard. Buy-
Back Gas is hydrocarbon gas used as fuel that has been produced by separate facilities and is available through the facility’s export gas riser to the gas pipeline. Hydrocarbon gas can  be used to run different types of 
machinery onboard the unit, and can be more economical and easier to 
obtain than having diesel fuel transported out to the unit via barge or OSV. 
In accordance with 33 CFR 140.5, the OCMI is authorized to exempt a unit 
under construction from any requirement of Subchapter N that would be 
impracticable or unreasonable to apply during construction or erection.   
  
This second letter, issued after the Quarters Habitable letter, acknowledges 
that the unit now has the capacity to handle gas introduction to specified 
areas and additional systems such as firefighting (in addition to that required 
for Quarters Habitable) and gas detection will now need to be inspected for 
the safety of the unit and crew.  
 
 
b. Example of Buy Back Gas Letter  
 
Dear Mr. / Mrs. (insert name here):  
 
Your original request, dated (insert date here), to bring Buy -Back Gas onboard has been 
reviewed.  The arrangements have also been subsequently discussed between your 
regulatory personnel and members of my sta ff.  These discussions and a walk -down of the 
systems occurred with inspections onboard (insert name of unit here) during the weeks of 
(insert dates here).  An in depth discussion was also conducted during a meeting on (insert 
date here) at our Outer Conti nental Shelf Inspection Office in (insert location here).  Your 
request to bring Buy -Back Gas onboard to (insert purpose here: ex. to serve as Fuel Gas for 
the Gas Turbine Generators) while maintaining increased manning levels for ongoing construction and commissioning work is herby “Approved”.  Additional stipulations are 
further discussed in the following paragraphs.  
 
Persons on Board (POB) can continue at the increased levels after Buy -Back Gas is 
introduced to the facility.  Maximum POB at any time is r estricted to a total of (insert 
number here) persons.  


 
                                                                    G4  - 7                                                                  CH -2 The installed gas detection system shall be fully operable, tested and accepted by both the 
(insert who approved the system here) and my OCS Inspections staff prior to the 
introduction of Buy -Back Gas.  
 
Buy-Back Gas is restricted to (insert where and which locations here: ex. those portions of 
the Compression, Generation and Production Modules) as previously presented.  
Introduction into additional portions of the systems for testing will require notifi cation to 
this office and possible reduced POB.  
 
############
The (insert floatel or unit here) shall be stationed (insert location here) as an additional 
precaution to reduce the number of "day workers" present in areas charged with Fuel Gas. 
This office shall be noti fied of work that may  require the (insert vessel or unit name here) to 
relocate to the (insert alternate landing location here). (This paragraph may be omitted if no 
floatel is utilized)  
 
This exemption permits this OCS facility to continue construction, but not engage in any 
activity associated with the exploration for, or development or production of the minerals of 
the Outer Continental Shelf.  
 
Should you have any questions or concerns, please contact (insert POC here).  
 
 
      c.  Standards  
 
All requests are to be evaluated based on gas detection being operational, 
fire-fighting capabilities and escape routes being available away from the 
buyback gas piping and machinery utilizing the buy -back gas.  
 
 
d. Distribution  
 
The original copy of the Buy- Back Gas letter should be issued directly to the 
operator of the unit; one copy should be electronically scanned and added to “documents” in MISLE. Additional copies may be obtained by the master, operator, owner, or agent of the unit upon written request to the OC MI. 
  
 
F. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STOWAGE OF OIL IN BULK 
 
A floating production facility that is also used for storage of oil in bulk will be considered a tank 
vessel and should comply with the regulations below.   
 
 
1. 46 CFR Subchapter  D, Tank Vessels.  
2. 33 CFR Part 157, Rules for the Protection of the Marine Environment Relating to Tank Vessels Carrying Oil in Bulk. 
 
 
G. CONVERSIONS  
 
When an existing ship, tankship, or tank barge i s converted to a FPSO unit, the Marine Safety 
Center m ust determine on a case by case basis if the conversion is considered major and if OPA 
90 requirements are applicable (e.g. , tank access requirements ). 
 
 
H. GUARDRAILS  
 
 1. 33 CFR Subchapter 143.110 requires a 42 inch top rail height for guardrails protec ting 
the perimeter and all openings on the decks of OCS facilities except MODU s. This type 
of rail is typical of a vessel rail with a greater top rail height to prevent a person from 
falling over. This requirement further  directs designers and operators of floating facilities 
to design criteria found in 46 CFR 108.  46 CFR 108.217 requires a 39.37  inch (or 1 
meter) top rail height for guardrails protecting the perimeter and all openings on the deck. 
This type of rail is mo re typical of a “vessel” rail with multiple courses to inhibit a person 
from washing through in a greenwater event.   
 2. Given the height of the decks on a floating facility (other than ship shape) and the motion dampening abilities of floating facilities  to date, the possibility of a greenwater event 
occurring while personnel  are onboard is remote and the rail height found in 33 CFR 
143.110 (42”), provides a higher level of safety for the most likely event that could occur, falling over versus washing thr ough.  
 3. Floating facilities are permitted to install either of the guardrail designs described above, provided that all rails throughout the entire facility on all deck perimete rs and openings 
are identical. Exception is made for the landing areas associate with stacked modular 
portable quarters. Here they must meet 46 CFR 108.217 (39”), because they are so frequently interchanged and deployed onboard conventional MODUs.  
 4. Removable  guardrails may be installed where operating conditions warrant t heir use. Due 
to the absence of adverse movements in floating facilities (other than ship shape) hull 
designs, designers and operators need not comply with  the internal storm rail 
requirements of 46 CFR 108.221 (b) and (c). Operators are still required to comply with the external storm rail requirements of 46 CFR 108.221 (a).  
 
############
5.   This direction on guardrail heights does NOT apply to floating facilities with 
conventional ship- shaped hulls.  


 
                                                                    G4  - 9                                                                  CH -2  
 
I. HELICOPTER FACILITIES  
 
The Coast Guard considers the helicopter lighting scheme of the 2009 MODU Code, Chapter 13 
"perimeter lights" to be to be at least as effective as the requirements of 46 CFR 108.241.  CG -
ENG has documented the acceptance of the international "green light" scheme on floating OCS 
facilities (see CG-ENG Policy Letter 01- 13). An OCMI may use this  CG- ENG policy letter as 
evidence of compliance for the purpose of issuing a COC to a foreign flag floating OCS facility ; 
an individual waiver should not be required.  
 
 
J. HOSE REELS WITH NON -COLLAPSIBLE HARD -RUBBER FIRE HOSES  
 
Commandant (CG- ENG- 4) has approved certain hose reels for use on floating facilities (other 
than ship shape and MODUs). These hose reels are required to be outfitted with non- collapsible 
hard- rubber hoses that meet Standard 92 of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. or Military 
Specification H24580. These hoses may be used on floating facilities as a substitute to the 
requir ed collapsible fire hose, subject to the following conditions:  
 
 
1. They may be installed only on open decks; or inside columns, pontoons, and machinery spaces as long as there is adequate room to unreel the hose to its full length. 
 2. Hydrants with colla psible “UL -19” hoses should be installed inside the accommodation 
spaces for immediate access by the crew. However, if there are no fire hydrants  installed 
inside the accommodation spaces, all of the following conditions must be met:  
 
(a) The accommodation module cannot be longer than 70 feet in length and 40 feet in width.  These dimensions may be further limited based on the “coverage” requirements of paragraph 3 (below) if there are obstructions (hallways and secondary rooms) inside the accommodation module.  
 (b) Coast Guard marine inspectors, during annual inspection, shall randomly select permanently- assigned floating facility personnel not normally part of a fire fighting 
team, and verify that they are familiar with the location of all firefighting  equipment ; 
specifically, the location of the external hose stations that are to be used for internal spaces.  
 
3. All fire hydrants (with collapsible or non -collapsible hoses) must meet the following 
“coverage” requirements per 46 CFR 108.423. 
 
(a) Fire hydrants with collapsible or non -collapsible hoses must be able to spray each 
                                                              G4 -  10                                                           accessible space with at least two effective spray patterns of water from separate 
hydrants.  
 (b) In all internal and external spaces, other than the main machinery space, at least one spray pattern of water must be from a  single length (50 feet) hose. If the hose is over 
50 feet in length, then only the first 50 feet of one hose at the hydrant may be used for determining coverage. The length of the second hose is unrestricte d, as long as 
minimum nozzle pressure of 50 psi can be provided with both hoses flowing. 
 (c) In the machinery space both spray patterns  of water must be from a single length (50 
feet) hose. If the hose is over 50 feet in length, then only the first 50 fee t of one hose 
at the hydrant may be used for determining coverage.  
 (d) NVIC 6 -72 allows for an effective spray pattern of about 20- 25 feet in still air.  
 4. Hose reels with non -collapsible hard rubber hoses that do not meet Standard 92 of the 
Underwriters  Laboratories, Inc. or Military  Specification  H24580 currently installed  
onboard existing floating facilities (other than ship shape) , must obtain specific approval 
from Commandant (CG- ENG- 4). 
 5. Replacement of only the non- approved fire hoses is acceptable. Replacement of the 
whole firefighting system  with appurtenances is not required.  However, the nozzles must 
be Coast Guard approved and compatible with the system.  The type of nozzle to be installed can normally be found on the Coast Guard type -approval certificate for the  hose.  
 
############
 
K. IN SERVICE INSPECTION PLANS (ISIP)  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
a. There are,  and continue to be , unique  and unconventional  floating facilities  being 
constructed to work in the OCS that are not fully addressed by the MODU 
drydocking regulations ref erenced by 33 CFR 143.120. F acilities, such as semi -
submersibles, TLP’s, mini -TLP’s and various SPAR and FPSO designs, are 
characterized by their  large size, ability to exceed the capacities of most drydocks, 
and a tendency  to remain permanently located on a fixed mooring for the life of the 
facility. Drydocking cycles are complex, if not impossible, and the ISIP program was introduced with these types  of facilities  in mind. 
 
b. Com panies operating one of these facilities  must ensure that a customized and 
approved ISIP Plan is developed.  The ISIP must address the hull (internal and external ) inspection  intervals, taking into account the unique structures of these units.  
33 CFR 143.120, Floating OCS Facilities , refers to  46 CFR 107.261 and .265 for 


 
                                                                    G4  - 11                                                                  CH -2 drydock inspection requirements. 33 CFR 143.120 also provides for equivalences 
when appropriate and is the basis for authorizing floating facilities to  participate in 
the ISIP to meet dryd ocking requirements.  
 
c. The following guidelines provide consistency for the drydocking requirements of 
floating facilities while maintaining the authority of the OCMIs to modify inspection intervals as necessary to address the uniqueness of  each facility .  
 
 
2. Approval  
 
a. Companies requesting to use this program should develop their ISIP Plans, for 
submittal to the OCMI of the zone that a facility will initially be operating, per 33 CFR 143.120, requiring floating OCS facilities to submit plans per 46 CFR 107 subpart C: The requirements of the ISIP Plan draw heavily from NVIC 1 -89 
Underwater Survey Guidance, as modified by the  comments in S ection 4 (the 
Inspection Process)  of this subpart.  
 
b. Companies  requesting to use the ISIP  should submit their plans a minimum of 90 
days prior to entry of the facility into service, to the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspections (OCMI) of the zone that the facility will initially be o perating.  
 c. OCMI’s  may s eek additional guidance from the appropriate district office or 
Commandant ( CG-CVC- 2), as necessary.  
 
 
3. The Plan 
 
a. The ISIP Plan is a two -part document that addresses prescriptive and operational 
considerations, as well as  provides plans that identify the crucial/ high stress 
inspection points.  
 
(1) The Operational Procedures and Requirements section of the ISIP Plan will be reviewed  by the cognizant OCMI. 
 (2) The Structural Critical Inspection Points (SCIP) section of the ISIP Plan must include an explanation as to why a section/area is designated as a SCIP and must 
be reviewed by the facilities classification society.  
 
(a) In the event the structure is not under classification, the Coast Guard Marine Safety Center (MSC) wi ll conduct the review of the SCIP section 
of the ISIP and MSC must include an explanation as to why the are a is 
being designated as such.  
(b) Submissions  for review by the MSC should be submitted a minimum of 90 
days prior to entry of the facility into se rvice, which is the date the 
Certificate of Inspection,  is issued and usually the date of “ first oil”.  
 
############
(c) Upon completion of their review, the Class ification Society (or 
Recognized Organization (RO))  or MSC shall provide a statement saying: 
“This plan ha s been reviewed and appropriately identifies all crucial and 
high stress areas to be inspected.”  
 
b. The ISIP plan should be approved prior to the initiation of operat ions by the floating 
facility. Plans that were approved prior to 11 Feb ruary  2003, (the original date of the 
Commandant (C G-MOC- 2) Policy Letter 03 -01, which initiated the implementation 
date) , may continue to be used unless a situation occurs (such as excessive wastage, 
cracking, etc.) that results in the OCMI determining that the plan s hould be review ed 
and modifications required. Subsequent c hanges and modification to plans with 
approval dates prior to Feb 11, 2003, are required to meet the provision of this section.  
 
 
4. The Inspection Process  
 
The following areas are specific to the ISIP program and represent a d eviation from the 
UWILD program  
 
a. Prior to entry into the ISIP Program : 
 
(1) Since TLPs and SPARs are typically too large to examine  in drydock, a full 
assessment of the hull structure shall be made prior to  initial placement of it, o r its 
section, into the water.  
 (2) As listed in NVIC 1 -89, a full video survey of the condition of the hull or its parts 
shall be made for future reference purposes.  
 (3) Notifications of the major events surrounding the construction and launching of the facilities hull shall be made to the OCMI of the zone in which  the facility  will 
initially be operating; providing ample opportunity for Marine Inspectors to examine and document the initial condition of the hull.  
 
b. Inspection Cycles . 
 
(1) If the facility class is of a novel to  unconventional design, a 40% annual 
inspection cycle (equivalent to twice in 5 years) must be used for the first five 
years of th e OCS facilities service life.  


 
                                                                    G4  - 13                                                                  CH -2  
(2) After five years, if there have been n o major issues;  the OCMI may consider 
allowing a Modified Inspection schedule, “once in five year” (20% annually) cycle.  
 (3) A facility class is considered novel or unconventional if: 
 
(a) There is no known facility of similar design on the U.S. OCS; and 
 (b) There is no design standard (i.e. , Coast Guard regulations, classification 
society rules accepted by the Coast Guard, or industry standards accepted by the Coast Guard) on the facility. 
 
(4) The decision to allow a facility to be placed in an  alternat ive inspection program 
should be based on the results of previous exams of similar facilities, the quality of the operating company’s previous inspections for other facilities and any unique operating conditions of the facility. The company should have a satisfactory history of operating floating OCS fa cilities for at least 5 years. They 
should be proactive in their preventative maintenance program and are encouraged to meet some  type of quality certification program.  Additionally, if 
the facility experien ces a significant fractures or hull degradation during the initial 
cycle, the OCMI may require a more stringent inspection schedule or return to the equipment schedule in 4.b (1) above. 
 (5) Under the 40% annual inspection cycle it is acceptable for a comp any to inspect 
100% of the hull every 2-1/2 years vs. 40% ever y year.  
 (6) For Facilities on the Modified Inspection Program (20% annual inspection cycle 
which is equivalent  to once- in -5 years), companies may elect to inspect 50% of 
the hull every 2-1/2 years vs. 20% every year. 
 (7) ISIP Inspection Intervals: 
 
############
 
Interval or … Alternative Option Inspection Cycle  
Internals (Internal; 40% Annually 100% @ 2-1/2 yrs Twice -in-5 yrs  Structural Exam)  
Externals: (Underwater 40% Annually 100% @ 2-1/2 yrs Twice -in-5 yrs  
Survey) 
                                                              G4 - 14                                                           As an option for floating OCS facilities  built and inspected in quadrants, the 
following options may apply: 
 
 Interval or … Alternative Option  Inspection Cycle  
Internals (Internal; 2 quadrants every 4 quadrants @ 2-Structural Exam)  15 months (40% Twice -in-5 yrs  1/2 yrs annually) 
Externals: 
(Underwater 40% annually 100% @ 2-1/2 yrs Twice -in-5 yrs  
Surveys)  
 
(8)  For qualifying floating OCS facilities, the OCMI may approve an ISIP with thi s 
“modified inspection program”. 
 
 Interval or… Alternative Option  Inspection Cycle  
Internals (Internal; 20% annually 50% @ 2-1/2 yrs Once -in-5 yrs  Structural Exam)  
Externals: (Underwater 20% annually 50% @ 2-1/2 yrs Once -in-5 yrs  
Surveys) 
 
As an option for floating OCS facilities built and inspected in quadrants, the 
following options may apply: 
 
 Interval or … Alternative Option  Inspection Cycle  
Internals (Internal; 1 quadrant every 2 quadrants @ 2-Structural Exam)  15 months (20% Once -in-5 yrs  1/2 yrs annually) 
Externals: (Underwater 20% annually 50% @ 2-1/2 yrs Once -in-5 yrs  
Surveys) 
 
c. Inspection Procedures . 
 
(1) In any of the cases above, the examination must be conducted within 2- 3 years of 
the last exam and no more than 5 years may elapse from the previous. 
 (2) For those facilities placed on the Modified Inspection Program, the internal structural examination shall be conducted on a different portion of the internal 
areas of the facilities external hull . 
 
(3) The remaining portions of the internal structure and outer hull must then be 
completed over the next 2.5 years resulting in a complete internal and external exam by the end of a 5 year period. 


 
                                                                    G4  - 15                                                                  CH -2 (4) The underwater examination of the external hull shall include all applicable sea 
valves, sea chests, cathodic pr otection, and special examinations of critical 
structures  which have been designated in the approved ISIP plan. 
 
(5) During each hull examination under both the “twice in five year” and the “once in 
5 year” cycles, the internal hull exams shall be conducted at different area s from 
the external hull exam. For example, if an internal exam is conducted in one quadrant, the external exam should be conducted in a different quadrant.  However, if fractures, flaws, or corrosion is noted on one side (on the interior or exterior) of the hull plating, the other side of the plating should be examined. 
 
 
5. Facilities 15 Years of Age and Older  
 
a. After 15 years of age , the hull inspection intervals will return to the full requirement 
of both internal  and external exami nations required twice in 5 years, unless the 
companies requests and is granted an ext ension from the cognizant OCMI.  
 b. In considering an extension of the modified inspection program, the OCMI shall consider:  
 
(1) the change in condition of the hull from  the initial underwater surveys to the most 
recent survey (gauging report as detailed  in Section 3 of NVIC 1 -89 may be 
accepted to assess condition);  
 
############
(2) the repair frequency of critical areas; and  
 
(3) coating and condition of internal tanks and voids.  
 
c. Based  on this and any additional information, the OCMI may extend the ISIP for this 
floating faci lity 5 or 10 additional years.  
 d. The owner must request a new extension at the conclusion of each OCMI approved extension to continue the intervals listed  in 4.b (1) or (2)  of Section 4 ( The 
Inspection Process) of  this Subpart.  
 
 
  6. Survey Procedures  
 
a. The majority of facilities will not be capable of increasing freeboard for visual 
inspection of the hull, through reduction of ballast. Where a facility cannot practically 
                                                              G4 -  16                                                           “light ballast” such as a TLP or SPAR, it may remain at operating drafts for the 
survey.  
 b. Though these floating facilities are designed to survive extreme weather situations, such as hurricanes, they do not have the a bility to relocate or change  their  heading as 
a vessel would to confront adverse weather conditions . For information on Post 
Hurricane Inspection procedures see Chapter 1 Part I, of this Section  G.  
 c. Inspection of the internal and external parts of the hull shall be conducted as per the ISIP Plan to the satisfaction of the attending m arine i nspector in order for the 
company to receive credit for the examination. Third party inspectors are not to be 
used as a replacement for the CG Inspector; however they  may be utilized to augment 
the marine inspector and perform specialized inspection tasks such as nondestructive testing (NDT).  
 d. The scheduling of the hull examination and other required inspections (i.e., 
Inspections for Certification and Annual Inspections) must be coordinated so that marine inspector attendance is required no more than onc e per year, unless 
specifically approved by the OCMI. 
 
 7. In Service Inspection program (ISIP) Plan – Organization  
 
a. Below is an outline of the ISIP plan and how it should be organized when it is submitted for approval/review. 
 b. This ISIP organization shall be followed in development if new ISIP’s. Companies 
may add additional sections or make minor deviations from the outline structure below, as long as the minimum contents have been included and basic outline adhered 
to. Companies may also include large tables and procedural lists as appendixes that are referenced from within the main document.  
 c. ISIP’s that have  been approved prior to Feb 11, 2003, may retain their original 
formatting. However, format revision must follow the new guidance below. 
 
Table of Contents  
 
I. Introduction  
 
A. General Description  
 
B. Regulatory compliance, standards and interface with regulators  
 
C. Nomenclature  


 
                                                                    G4  - 17                                                                  CH -2  
D. References  
 
II. Operational  Procedures and Requirements  
 
A. Inspection Procedures  
 
1. Description  of underwater body inspections and internal  structural 
inspection. NVIC 1 -89 (as modified by this Section G ) should be 
consult ed in development of this section. 
 
2. Detailed scope of individual inspection types that may potentially be 
employed such as hull gauging, ROV operations, tank entry, NDT, and 
visual inspections.  
 
3. Special inspection techniques, interval and procedures for those 
crucial/high stress locations.  
 
############
4. Discussion of general dive operations, safety standards and interaction 
with diving contractors.  
 
5. Procedural checklists for each operation. 
 
6. The inspection technique for inspecting the shell plating from the inside. 
 
7. The inspection technique for inspecting the underwater portion of the hull. 
 
B. Inspection Schedule and Frequency  
 
1. Outline of general inspection schedule and frequency as required.  This 
should discuss high level scheduling and complement the detailed 
inspection cycle as for completion listed in Part C (below).  
 2. The extent of each annual inspection and the areas to be inspected for the lifetime of the facility at the intended site.  
 
C. Facility Component Identification  
 
1. General description of facility including listing of measurements and particulars.  
                                                              G4 -  18                                                           2. Hull description. Description of hull and special features including general 
discussion of scantlings and areas of high stress concerns ( inspection 
cycles and general inspection  procedures) . 
 3. Structural Critical Inspection Points. General discussion of types of areas 
that are considered crit ical and types of inspections. Reference details in 
Section III of th is document (page 4 -15) for all specifics.  
 
4. Sea chest and sea valv es. (Listing, details, inspection cycles, general 
inspection procedure.) The method to blank/plug and remove each sea valve  during each 5- year period. The method to ensure operability of each 
sea valve and to externally examine all sea chests/valves for deterioration and marine growth during each 2- 1/2 year period. 
 5. Cathodic protection systems and anodes. This section should include listing, details, inspection cycles & general inspection procedure  for 
cathodic protection systems and anodes . 
 6. Accessible compartments and voids.  These sections should include listing, details, inspection cycles, general inspection procedure s for 
accessible compartments and voids.  
 7. In accessible compartments and voids. This section should include l isting, 
preci se location, details, inspection cycles, general inspection procedures 
and provisions taken to ensure continued integrity of the in accessible 
compartments and voids .) 
 D. Reporting and Documentation  
 
1. General record keeping procedures for reports and surveys (company policy).  
 2. Notification and report delivery procedures involving the classification society and the Coast Guard.  
 3. Specific record keeping procedures and report contents for each component category in Section C.  
 4. Record keeping for dives conducted during inspections of the underwater hull. 
 5. The manner in which deficiencies and the procedures for their repair will be handled.  


 
                                                                    G4  - 19                                                                  CH -2 E. Damage Assessment  & Repair Procedures  
 
1. Discussion of categories of damage and company procedures to mitigate.  
 
2. Casualty notification procedures with regard to 33 CFR 149.30 and 46 
CFR 109 following damage to facility relating to underwater body and hull structure. 
 3. Specific procedures and methods to investigate damage or potential damage to hull or  internal structures.  
 4. Procedures to submit proposed methods for repair of both underwater defects and damage  to the RO and the Coast Guard.  
 
III. Structural Critical Inspection Points  
 
A. Details of structurally critical location s on the hull of the fa cility (listing, 
details, inspection cycles & general inspection procedure) . 
 B. Drawings detailing the crucial/high stress inspection points as determined by a recognized RO or by the MSC . 
 
############
 
L. Manning of Non -self Propelled Floating Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Facilities  
 
 
1. Purpose  
 
This section does not apply to ship -shape floating production systems (FPSs) or 
floating production, storage, and off loading systems (FPSOs). Floating OCS Facilities as defined in 33 CFR 140.10 includes but are not limited to tension leg platforms (TLPs),  SPARS, and non- self propelled FPSs. Regulation in 33 CFR, 
Subchapter N specifically exclude mobile offshore drilling units (MODUs) from the definition of floating OCS facilities. 33 CFR 143.120(c) authorizes the cognizant Officer in charge of Marine Inspe ction (OCMI) to issue a Certificate of Inspection 
(COI) after determining that the floating OCS facility meets all applicable requirements.  For each COI issued, the OCMI designates an appropriate manning level to ensure the floating OCS facility can be op erated safely during both routine 
and emergency conditions.  
 
 
2.   Manning  
                                                              G4 -  20                                                           a.  The following baseline manning scales are established for floating OCS facilities: 
 
Floating OCS Facilities:  
One (1) - CG Licensed Offshore Installation Manager (OIM)  
One (1) - CG Licensed Barge Supervisor (BS)  
Two (2) -  CG Licensed Ballast Control Operators (BCOs)  
Two (2) -  Able Seaman  
One (1) – Ordinary Seaman  
Persons in charge of Survival Craft determined per 46 CFR 109.323. 
 
b.  One of the two BCOs may be eliminated provided  the OCMI is satisfied that the 
safety of the unit will not be compromised by maintaining a periodically unattended ballast control room. The owner/operator of the facility would need to prove that the damage stability criterion is so robust that the facil ity wouldn’t 
need to ballast in a worst case environmental condition for that location.  Existing units (units with manning scales already accepted by the local OCMI as of the issuance of this version of the MSM) would be grandfathered in and their current  manning scales would remain.  
 
c. A trained “firefighting specialist” holding course completion certificates from approved firefighting and first aid courses meeting the requirements of 46 CFR 10.205(g) and 46 CFR 10.205(h)(1) respectively may be substituted for the required Able or Ordinary Seaman. The “firefighting specialist” need not hold either a Coast Guard license or MMD. A licensed officer serving in a position required on the floating OCS facility’s COI may not be “double counted” as a 
firefighting specialist. Licensed officers in excess of those required on the unit’s 
COI may be counted as a “firefighting specialist.”  
 
d. The required number of person’s in charge of survival craft shall be listed on the COI as “Certified Lifeboatman,” but may be filled by deck officers (offshore installation mangers, barge supervisors, and ballast control operators), able seaman, or certified persons.  It is not mandatory for deck officers to possess an MMD with a Lifeboatman endorsement to serve in this ca pacity.  
 e. The sample manning scales above represent baselines for the OCMI to use in evaluating required manning for each floating OCS facility. The actual manning required by the OCMI could be more or less depending on the specifics of the particular fl oating OCS facility.  
 
############
f. When establishing manning requirements for floating OCS facilities, OCMI’s shall consider the units stability characteristics, mooring arrangement and the frequency of required ballasting operations (or tendon/mooring system tensioning), including the degr ee of ballast system automation. Other factors to 
consider in establishing appropriate manning include whether produced oil is 


 
                                                                    G4  - 21                                                                  CH -2 stored aboard the facility, including the mooring and unmooring requirements 
of any associated lightering operations.  
 g. For no n-self propelled floating OCS facilities, the deck officers, who include 
offshore installation managers, barge supervisors, and ballast control operators, may serve as persons in charge of survival craft even if they do not possess a Merchant Mariner’s Document (MMD) with a lifeboatman endorsement. All OCMIs shall include the following endorsement on the COI for these facilities to clarify this matter:  
 
“THE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PERSONS IN CH ARGE OF SURVIVAL 
CRAFT LISTED ON THIS DOCUMENT AS ‘CERTIFIED LIF EBOATMAN” 
MAY BE FILLED BY DECK OFFICERS (OFFSHORE INSTALLATION 
MANGERS, BARGE SUPERVISORS, AND BALLAST CONTROL 
OPERATORS), ABLE SEAMAN, OR CERTIFICATED PERSONS.”  
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
A. Applicability of Regulations         G5-2 
 
B. Developing Partnerhips with BSEE       G5-2 
 
C. Lifesaving Equipment  on Unmanned Fixed Platforms     G5-2 
 
D. Fixed Platform Inspection Program        G5-3 
1. Jurisdiction          G5-3 
2. Inspections          G5-3 
3. Investigations          G5-5 
4. Fixed OCS Facility Inspection Report, Form CG -5432   G5-5 
5. Emergency Evacuation Plans (EEPs)       G5-5 
6. Lifesaving/ Firefighting Equipment       G5-6 
7. Catwalks – Manned Platforms       G5-6 
8. Single Well Caissons – Unmanned Platforms     G5-6 
9. Swing Ropes and Knotted Man Ropes      G5-7 
 A. Applicability of Regulations  
 
A fixed Outer Continental Shelf  (OCS) facility means a bottom -founded OCS facility 
permanently attached to the seabed or subsoil  of the (OCS), including platforms, guyed towers, articulated gravity platforms, and other structures as noted in 33 CFR 140.10.  
 
The regulations found in 33 CFR Subchapter N are applicable to all fixed OCS facilities 
operating outside of state waters. All fixed facilities must be marked in accordance with the regulations found in 33 CFR 67.  
 The Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act  (OCSLA) , as amended , directs the Coast Guard and 
Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement ( BSEE)  to conduct initial and annual 
inspections of OCS facilities. The annual inspection may be in the form of scheduled or 
unannounced inspections.  This inspection requirement is further modified by 33 CFR 140, subpart B , which requir es the 
Coast Guard to conduct initial inspections and allows the owner/operator of the facility to 
conduct annual self - inspections. The C oast G uard (NCOE) will conduct recurring training with 
and for BSEE to be able to conduct these inspections  on the CGs behalf. 
 
 
B. DEVELOPING PARTNERHIPS WITH BSEE  
 OCMIs are encouraged to develop partnerships with regional B SEE personnel to achieve the 
following:  
 
a. Develop lines of communication for information exchange.  
 b. Accompany BSEE inspectors on a space available basis.  
 
c.   Develop a targeting strategy for OCS facilities.  
 
 
C. LIFESAVING EQUIPMENT ON UNMANNED FIXED PLATFORMS   
 
33 CFR 144.10- 1 does not specifically require that lifesaving equipment be available on an 
unmanned platform at all times ; it is only required when personnel are on the platform.  
  
############
D. FIXED PLATFORM INSPECTION PROGRAM  
 
The Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCLSA) authorizes the Coast Guard to utilize another 
federal agency for the enforcement of Coast  Guard regulations on the OCS. On Feburary 7, 
2002, the Coast Guard amended 33 CFR part 140 to grant  BSEE the authority to act on behalf of 
the Coast Guard to perform  inspections on fixed OCS facilities  in order to ensure compliance 
with Title 33 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter  N,  Outer Continental Shelf Activities . 
The Coast Guard continue s to be responsible f or initial fixed facility inspections .  However, once 
the initial inspection has been completed, the annual oversight inspections are conducted by 
BSEE inspectors on the behalf of the Coast Guard .  The Coast Guard retain s regulatory authority 
over its self -inspection program , with BSEE responsible for ensuring compliance  with self 
inspections . 
 
 
1. Jurisdiction  
 
In accordance with the jurisdiction afforded  us by OCSLA the  Coast Guard has 
jurisdiction over fixed OCS facilities in waters beyond the seaward  limits of state 
waters.  Fixed OCS facilities located in state waters are not subject to Coast Guard 
inspection and are not included in this program. 
 
 
2. Inspections  
 
a. 33 CFR Subchapter N requires owners and operators of fixed OCS facilities to 
conduct a n annual  self-inspection. These facilities  are also subject to scheduled 
and unscheduled spot -check inspections.  
 
b. BSEE administer s the fixed platform annual oversight inspection program on 
behalf of the Coast Gua rd to ensure compliance  with 33 CFR Subc hapter N. 
 c. BSEE ensures compliance with the self -inspection program and conduct s spot-
check inspections on fixed OCS facilities. The Coast  Guar d will continue to 
conduct initial inspections on newly constructed fixed OCS facilities . 
 d. While BSEE is acting on behalf of the Coast Guard, there is nothing to prevent  a 
Coast Guard inspector from  conducting a spot check inspection on a fixed facility 
at any time or concurrently with ot her OCS inspection activities. MIs are 
encouraged to conduct such spot checks when conducting other activities in the vicinity of a fixed platform. The Coast Guard shall forward the results of all spot check inspections regardless of the findings the appropriate BSEE office.  
 
e. If the Coast Guard issues a Vessel/ Facility Inspection Requirements, Form CG - 
  
      835, during a spot check inspection, the inspector shall ensure the owner/operator 
corrects the deficiency within a reasonable time frame (generally no more than 30 
days).  
 
f. The initial inspection process:  
 
(1) District receives and reviews the Application for Class I Aids to Navigation 
on Artificial Islands and Fixed Structures, Form CG -4143, submitted by 
facility owner/operator.  
 (2) Districts shall ensure timely approval and forwarding of the app lications to the 
cognizant OCMI.   
 (4) The OCMI conducts initial  OCS fixed facility inspection s per 33 CFR 
Subchapter N within 45 days  or upon notification  from owner/operator that 
the facility is ready.  
 (5) The OCMI documents the results of the initial inspection in MISLE. 
 (6) The OCMI ensures that all outstanding deficiencies are corrected in a timely 
manne r. OCMI forwards documentation including the Application for Class I 
Aids to Navigation on Artificial Islands and Fixed Structures, Form CG -4143, 
and Inspection results to BSEE.  
 
############
(7) Inspection responsibilities are turned over to BSEE.  
 
g. BSEE Inspectors use a Potential Incidents of Noncompliance (PINC) checklist together with the facility’s completed Fixed OCS Facility Inspection Report, Form CG-5432 to ensure com pliance with Coast Guard Regulations.  
 h. BSEE inspectors issue an Incident of Noncompliance (INC) to the owner/operator 
for any deficiencies that can’t be corrected during the course of the inspection. INCs may include a  warning, comp onent  shut-in, or a facility s hut-in, depending 
on the severity of the deficiency and the safety hazard that it creates.  
 i. BSEE track s and verif ies that all outstanding deficiencies are corrected within a 
reasonable timeframe (generally no more than 30 days). Noted deficiencies that are corrected during the course of the inspection are documented by BSEE. 
 j. Appeals of regulatory actions and resultant penalties shall be processed exclusively by the issuing agency ( Coast Guard or BSEE) in accordance with the 
issuing agency’s appeal process.  
3. Investigations  
 
As specified in Title 33  CFR Subchapter N , and within the 2009 MOA between BSEE 
and the Coast Guard , the Coast Guard retain s investigation responsibilities for all 
incidents related to OCS activities.  
 
a. Where the Coast Guard and BSEE hav e overlapping responsibilities, the agencies 
should work together to minimize or elimin ate the duplication of effort.  
 
b. The Coast Guard will normally be the lead investigative agency for incidents 
listed in 33 CFR 140.201. 
 
c. All incidents subject to investigation under 33 CFR 140.201 shall be conducted in 
accordance with 46 CFR 4 and documented in MISLE  
 
 
4. Fixed OCS Facility Inspection Report, Form CG -5432 
 
a. Facility owners and operators do not need to submit Fixed OCS Facility Inspection Report, Form CG -5432, to the Coast Guard or BSEE. Instead the 
operator shall conduct the required self -inspection annua lly and retain a copy of 
the Fixed OCS Facility Inspection Report, Form CG -5432, on board the facility.  
 b. By regulation , the two (2) most recent Self – Inspection Reports (or two years 
worth of inspection reports) shall be retained on board.  
 c. BSEE ins pectors verify that  the Fixed OCS Facility Inspection Report, Form CG -
5432, has been completed during their annual inspection of each facility.  
 d. In instances where the Fixed OCS Facility Inspection Report, Form CG -5432, 
cannot be retained on board (unmanned facilities with no living quarters) ; a copy 
may be retained at an alternate locati on convenient to the operator. Upon request, 
the facility  operator must provide copies of any Fixed OCS Facility Inspection 
Report, For m CG -5432’s,  to the Coast Guard or BSEE.  
 
(e)  The Fixed OCS Facility Inspection Report, Form CG -5432, shall be 
completed within, and not to exceed, 12 months from the last inspection date.  
( Ex. If an inspection was last completed on 02JUN2014, the next inspection must be completed on or before the end of the month of JUNE2015.)  
 
 
5. Emergency Evacuation Plans (EEPs)  
The C oast Guard will review and approve EEPs in accordance with  33 CFR 146.140. 

############

G5 - 6 during their inspection of fixed facilities , BSEE inspectors ensure compliance with EEP 
requirements.  
 
 
6. Lifesaving/ Firefighting Equipment 
 
a. Variances. BSEE consult s with the local OCMI to determine suitable options, 
temporary measures or restrictions during the repair or replacement of required 
firefighting  equipm ent and lifesaving appliances. B SEE initiate s this process with  
the local OCMI.  In cases where the owner/operator contacts the Coast Guard directly, BSEE  shall be notified immediately.  
 b. Approval proc ess. The  Coast Guard  shall continue to approve equipment for use 
on fixed offshore facilities and publish the list of approved equipment in the Federal Register  and C OMDT INST  M16714.3 ( Series) in accordance with 33 
CFR 140.15(b). The Coast Guard shall also notify BSEE of any newly approved equipment and provide training as needed. 
 
 
7. Catwalks  – Manned Platforms  
 33 CFR 143.101 (c) requires all manned OCS facilities  be provided with at least two primary means  of escape extending to the water . 33 CFR  143.101 (a) defines primary 
means of escape as fixed stairways or ladders of metal construction. For OCS facilities  
that are connected  to adjacent facilities by bridges, or catwalks which allow free access 
from one facility to another, the catwalk may ser ve as one of the primary means of escape 
provided:  
 
a. The catwalk leads to another location that  provides a primary means of escape 
extending to the water, and 
 b. There is a sufficient amount of primary lifesaving gear per 33 CFR 144.01 -1 or 
144.01- 15 at this alternate location to accommodate 100% of the personnel 
onboard the manned facility if they cross the catwalk and egress to the water via 
this alternate escape route.  
 
 
8. Single Well Caissons – Unmanned Platforms  
 33 CFR 143.101(d) requires unmanned OCS facilities be provided with one primary means of escape and, when personnel are onboard  and one secondary means of escape for 
every 10 persons onboard. In the case of small single -well caisson type facilities , the 
prim ary means of escape is usually a fixed ladder from the topside structure (work deck) 
to the waterline. Since the work deck on these platforms is typically very small, a worker 


G5 - 7 cannot  become trapped far from the primary escape route. F urthermore, the risk to 
workers attending these facilities  is quite low because there is  usually very little 
processing equipment onboard, plus the limited frequency and duration in which 
personnel visit these facilities  further lessens the risk. Taking al l this into consideration, a 
single -well caisson type  facility must have one primary means of escape but will not be 
required to have a  secondary  means of escape, even when workers are on the platform, 
provided:  
 
a. The work deck is no more than 20 ft x 20ft (or 400 square feet) in size, and  
 
b. The work deck is no more t han 20 ft above mean low water.  
 
 
9. Swing Ropes and Knotted Man Ropes  
 
A primary means of escape shall be installed to meet the requirements in 33 CFR 
143.101. A secondary means of escape shall be constructed and installed t o the 
satisfaction of the cognizant OCMI. Item (8) of Fixed Platform Inspection Program, CCGD8INST 16711.1 (series)  is the recommen ded standard  for constructi on and 
maintaining man ropes and swing ropes. Particul ar atte ntion should be given t o man 
ropes and s wing ropes due to weathering of the ropes and the dangers  that are 
encountered when using these devices.  Man ropes should be replaced immediately if there is any evidence or wear, dry rot, mildew or ultraviolet dete rioration. Swing ropes are subject to all the same considerations 
as man ropes.    
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
############
A. Offshore Supply Vessels (OSVs)        G6-2 
1. Definition/Applicability        G6-2 
2. Change of S ervice         G6-2a 
3. Delivery of Excess F uel to Drilling P latforms     G6-3 
4. Rescue Boats          G6-3 
B. Liftboats           G6-6 
1. Drydock/Structural Examination      G6-6 
2. Drydocking Alternatives        G6-7 
3. Conducting a Liftboat Drydock Inspection      G6-7 
4. Leg Removal and Inspection Intervals      G6-8 
5. Legs, Jackhouses, and Support Structures      G6-12 
6. Hydraulic Jacking Systems        G6-13 
7. Engineering Related Systems        G6-14 
8. Steel Wastage Allowance       G6-15 
9. Tailshaft Inspection Intervals and Examinations     G6-16 
10. Lifesaving Policy         G6-17 
11.  Firefighting and Alarm Equipment       G6-18 
12. General Operations         G6-18 
13. Cranes           G6-19 
14. Route Restrictions         G6-20 
15. Manning          G6-20 
16. Domestic Voyage Personnel Carriage Allowance     G6-20 
17. International Voyages         G6-21 
18. Security          G6-21 
 
C. Drilling Tenders         G6-21 
1. Inspection procedures         G6-21 
2. Drydocking          G6-22 
 
D. Crewboats           G6-22 
1. Exemption from Tank Vessel Requirements      G6-22 
2. Fuel Transfers          G6-22 
3. COI          G6-22 
 
E. Offshore Renewable Energy Installations (OREI)     G6-22 
 
F. Accomodation Servi ce Vessels        G6-23 
 
G. Other Foreign Flag Vessels Working on the U.S. OCS     G6-24 


G6 - 2 A. OFFSHORE SUPPLY VESSELS (OSV S) 
 
 
1. Definition/Applicability  
 
For U. S. vessels, as long as the vessel in question fits the definition of an OSV, it is 
considered an OSV and may be inspected as such. 
 
a. An OSV is defined in 46 U.S.C. 2101(19) as “a motor vessel that regularly carries goods, supplies, individuals in addition to the crew, or equipment in support of exploration, exploitation, or production of offshore mineral or energy resources” (See Note 1 below)  
 
b. The application of this definition is not affected by the physical location of the vessel. 
The word "offshore," as it modifies "supply vessel" has no geographical significance.  
 c. “Offshore" is not defined by statute or regulation. Past administrative policy has been to define "offshore" as that water seaward of the coastline (as  measured from the 
mean high water mark). 
 d. Additionally, 46 CFR Subchapter L allows for the granting of "grandfather" status to previously certified OSVs, provided they maintained a COI prior to the effective date of the regulations and they continue to receive inspections following the same guidance enforced prior to the effective date of the regulations. The "grandfather" status is forfeited should the vessel change its service from OSV to another service or undergo a major modifications.  
 
 OSV’s less than 6,000 GT ITC (500 GRT if GT ITC not assigned) that were grandfathered had to complete construction and had to receive a COI prior to 16 March 1998.  OSVs of at least 6,000 GT ITC (500 GRT if GT ITC not assigned) that were grandfathered had to complete construction and receive a COI prior to 18 Au gust 2016. 
       
  
 
NOTE 1: Section 617 of the Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2010 (PL 111 -281) 
amended 46 U.S.C. 2101(19) by removing the tonnage limitation in the definition of 
‘offshore supply vessel.’ As a result, OSVs as defined under 46 U.S.C. 2101(19) are 
covered under this waiver, while operating from a foreign port, regardless of 
tonnage limitation (46 CFR 15.720(b)(1)). The 1,600 GRT (GT ITC if GRT is not 
assigned) limitation specified in 46 U.S.C. 8103(b)(3)(A) pertains to other similarly 
engaged vessels, which are not covered under 46 CFR 15.720(b). For other vessels 
in service similarly engaged, see Section H.5.b. of this Chapter.  
2. Change of S ervice  
 
############
If an inspected OSV surrende rs its COI or otherwise changes service, certain privileges 
granted to that c lass of vessel no longer apply. Tonnage, manning, and subdivis ion are 
several areas affected.  
 
a. Tankage previously exempted as ballast wate r spaces for offshore drilling,  mining, 
and related purposes may be included in the new tonnage of  the vessel unless 
otherwise exempted. A review of any ballast exemption in excess of 30 percent of the 
vessel’s gross tonnage, calculated without any allowance for water ballast, is required for the new service of the vessel.  
 
 b.   In the manning area, the 600 mile voyage, two watch s ystem for OSVs is no longer 
applicable , per 46 U.S.C  8301 (b).  
 
c. With respect to subdivision, the installation of Class 1 watertight doors is restricted 
outside the offshore oil trade. 
 
 
3. Delivery of Excess F uel to D rilling Platforms  
 
Under 46 U.S.C. 3702(b), certain OSVs are permitted to transfer fuel from their own fuel 
tanks to offshore drilling or production facilities without being inspected and certificated as tank vessels.  
 a. 46 U.S.C. Chapter 37 does not apply to a documented vessel under these circumstances, provided the vessel in question is not more than 500 GT, is not a tanker and is in the service of oil exploration. 46 CFR Subchapter L grants further exceptions to the carriage of flammable and combustible liquids.  
 b. The allowable amount of flammable or combustible liquids, as listed in 46 CFR 
30.25- 1, may be carried aboard an OSV as l ong as it does not exceed 20 percent of 
the vessel's deadweight. This rule does not apply to Grade D and E drilling fluids and excess fuel oils when they are carried in integral tanks.  
 c. The person on board an OSV engaged in this type of operation who is  in charge of 
the transfer operation  must be a certified tankerman.  
 
 
4. Rescue Boats  
 
46 CFR  133 requires the use of more stringent requirements than SOLAS approved craft on 
new U.S. flagged OSVs .  When any lifesaving appliance or arrangement on an OSV subject 
to this part is replaced, or when the OSV undergoes repairs, alterations, or modifications of a major character involving replacement of, or any addition to, the existing lifesaving appliances or arrangements, each new lifesaving appliance and arrangement must meet the requirements of 46 part  133, unless the OCMI determines that the OSV cannot 
accommodate the new appliance or arrangement . This same part  also allows for the 
substitution of a workboat in place of a required SOLAS approved rescue boat.  In all cases, the Coast Guard must ensure that the overall goal of safety of life at sea is accomplished 
while considering any change to existing rescue boat arrangements.  An OC MI’s decision to 
replace an existing rescue boat need not be based solely  upon a determination the craft i s no 
longer serviceable.  If the adequacy  of an existing,  but serviceable, rescue boat is in 
question, the OCMI should require demonst ration of its suitability  by a performance test to 
determine if replacement is necessary.  
 If a vessels rescue boat is determined  to be inadequate for its intended purpose, a 
requirement to correct the discrepancy shall be issued  by using the Vessel/Facility 
Inspection Requirments, Form CG-835.  Most existing OSV s will have three options 
availab le to correct this deficiency.  
  
############
a. Rescue Boats . Rescue Boat Approved under 46 CFR Appr oval Series 160.156.   
These are SOLAS approved rescue boats  and a launching recovery system that meets 
46 CFR 133.160. 
 
b. Suitable Workboat . As an alternative to the rescue boat requirement, a suitable 
workboat should meet the following:  
 
(1) Capable of being l aunched within five minutes.  
 
(2) Sufficient  seaworthiness (i.e. , adequate positive  buoyancy, stabi lity, freeboard or 
deck coverage) to allow for maneuvering in a disturbed seaway with at least a 
three person complement.  
 
(3) Adequate room for at least a two person crew with room for a third person lying 
down. 
 (4) Capable  of marshalling and towing inflatable liferafts (or lifeboats if the vessel is 
so equipped) loaded with their full complement of equipment and persons.  
 (5) Can affect  the recovery of a helpless person and return  that individual to the 
parent vessel within  fifteen  minutes. 
 (6) If freeboard constraints do not allow for proper launching and loading from the 
main deck, the workboat shall be equipped with a launching/recovery system that 
meets the  following:  
 
(a) Located such that the stowed vessel can be quickly launched and will swing clear of all rigging, stacks, structures and overboard discharges.  
 
(b) The davit and winch structural members shall have a design safety factor of 4.5 times the Maximum Working Load (MWL). MWL includes the 
total of the weight of the boat, personnel, and boat equipment. 
 (c) The falls, suspension chains, links and bloc ks shall have a design safety  
factor of 6 times the MWL.  
 (d) The davit shall be fitted with an electric/hydraulic  or hand powered winch 
and shall be capable of raising and lowering the workboat at MWL.  
 
(e) If electric /hydraulic powered, the davi t winch shall be fitted with 
automatic cut -off devices in accordance wi th SOLAS Chapter III Section 
VI. 
 (f) Each winch sha ll be designed to allow for lowering under the forces of 
gravity or independent  stored power.  
 (g) Each winch shall be fitted with a brake to control the rate of lowering to approximately 0.5 meters per second.  
 
(7) There are no firm rules on which boats may adequately serve as a workboat 
substitute for a rescue boat. However, experien ce has shown that the buoyancy 
and stability of rigid hull inflatables , or inflatable boats w ith reserve buoyancy, 
deep “V” hull and double “V” hull boats are suitable candidates for this service.   
Additionally, boats with outboard engines in the 15-30 horse power range have 
been  determined to be adequate for this service.   
 
c. Rescue Platform . 46 CFR 133.135 states that the vessel qualifying as a rescue 
platform must be arranged such that the resc ue can be observed from the navigation 
bridge. However, if this requirement cannot be met, vessels with an efficient and 
reliable method for providing two way communications between a person at the side 
of the vessel and the person at the helm  may be considered equivalent to 46 C FR 
133.135, if shown to be at least as effective.  
 
############
(1) To qualify as a r escue platform, a vessel shall demonstrate that it has the 
equipment  and trained crew to effect the recovery of a helpless person within 
fifteen minutes. Although there is no set of proscriptive  requirements that are 
necessary to meet the above essential com ponents of a vessel qualifying as a 
rescue platform:  
 
(a) The vessel should have an effective two -way communications system between 
the person at the rescue station and the person on the helm. 
 
(b) Each m ember of the crew should be trained  in his or her duties during a man 
overboard situation. ( There  is no way to foresee who will go overboard, there 
must be sufficient cross training to provide for all c ontingencies.)  
 
(c) The vessel should have a system to recover a helpless person from the  water 
while minimiz ing injury to that individual. To provide  for all contingencies, 
equipment used to affect  the recovery should be provided at each side of the  
  
vessel or must be easily and quickly transferrable to a recovery statio n at 
either side of  the vessel.  In addition to the recovery equipment, training and 
planning regarding the procedures to position a helpless person in the 
recovery apparatus must be planned and practiced. 
 (2) 46 CFR 133.135 allows certain OSVs  to act as its own rescue platform when it is 
not “regularly” restricted in its ability  to maneuver . Vessels that are “regularly” 
restricted in their ability to maneuver due to towing or anchor handling 
operations, may at the discretion of the OCMI, rely upon the rescue boat on the attended vessel to satisfy its rescue needs. To qualify for this provision, the vessel must prove to the OCMI that the rescue boat on the attended vessel meets all the requirements for  a rescue boat and that it  is sufficie ntly ma nned at all hours of the 
day to affect  a timely rescue.  
 
 
B. LIFTBOATS  
 Existing liftboats will be inspected initially and subsequently under the guidance provided in NVIC 8 -91. 46 CFR Subchapter L is applicable to new vessels contracted for or  delivered after 
15 March 1996. 
 
As with OSVs, all liftboats that were inspected and certified under the guidance found in NVIC 8-91 prior to the effective date of 46 CFR Subchapter L are granted grandfather status and must 
continue to receive inspections following the same guidance. The grandfather status is forfeit if 
the vessel changes its employment from OSV to another service or  undergoes major 
modifications.  
 
All vessels that were grandfathered had to complete construction and had to receive a COI pri or 
to 16 March 1998.  Most liftboats now fall under the same regulatory standards as conventional hulled OSVs; however there are several areas of inspection that are unique to this type of vessel to include: automation, steel wastage, tail shaft inspection  intervals, drydock inspections, lifesaving systems, 
firefighting equipment, systems/equipment for general operation, crane inspection and manning.  
 
 
1. Drydock/ Structural E xamination  
 The manner in which this examination will be performed should be very similar to that employed on independent leg jack- up MODUs.  
 
############
a. It is very likely that the initial exams will be conducted without benefit of approved plans, thus making determination of original scantlings difficult. In general, liftboat  
  
      scantlings are relatively light due to weight considerations. Therefore, requiring a 
comprehensive  ultrasonic testing  UT exam of the hull is appropriate. Close attention 
should be paid to plate inserts. Any doublers or spigot patches should be proper ly 
cropped and renewed.  
 
b. Specific welding procedures employed in the construction of these vessels may not be known. Where repairs are required, only current acceptable welding procedures should be employed. 
 
 2. Drydocking Alternatives  
 
There are many acceptable methods for conducting a liftboat hull exam. The following 
methods may generally be considered acceptable:  
 
a. Conventional Drydocking  – Includes lifting the vessel and its appendages out of the 
water to allow a comprehensive insp ection and evaluation of the vessel’s underwater 
hull, submerged portions of legs, towers and pads. 
 
b. Drydocking Alternatives  – The regulations provided for various alternatives which 
may provide an equivalent level of safety as a conventional vessel drydocking.  These regulations are found in 46 CFR Subchapter L, 46 CFR 125.170; and alternatives found in 46 CFR Subchapter I -A, 46 CFR 107.267 for self -elevating units.  OCMI’s 
may entertain dry- docking alternatives proposed by industry representatives. At no 
time shall the alternative method place the crew, shipyard workers, third party surveyors, contractors, or Coast Guard inspectors in danger.  
 
c. Underwater Inspection in Lieu of Drydocking (UWILD) –  This alternative may be 
utilized in accordance with 46 CFR 126.140. In such cases, the guidance in NVIC 1 -
89  “Underwater Survey Guidance” should also be followed. 
 
 3. Conducting a Liftboat Drydock Inspection  
 
Liftboats  spend the majority of their service life jacked up out of the water; so special 
attention must be paid to the following items: 
 
a. Pads  – These connections at the bottom of the legs are the main load -bearing area of 
the vessel.  The entire pad (top, botto m and all sides) should be visually inspected for 
damage/insets, by dry- docking or some other alternative method acceptable to the 
OCMI. The “leg -to-can” connection welds and the “can to -pad” connection welds 
should be non- destructively tested (NDT) at every hull exam or anytime the vessel 
has had an incident involving undue stress in these areas.  
  
b. Leg Tower Sponsons  – The area above the leg pad on the hull should be examined for 
deformation and fractures.  Often debris remains on the pad and may cause hull 
damage when the leg is retracted. This area is critical to the support of the leg and tower. If vertical deformation of the hull or insets are deep or numerous, the area 
should be cropped and renewed and suitable access provided to the leg sponson i n 
order to ensure the internal framing is not tripped or fractured.  
 
c. Legs and Leg R ack – The leg rack is another critical area of the vessel. This is where 
the hydraulic motor drive gear meets the mechanical leg rack.  Great amounts or 
torque are applied to this area on a regular basis. The racks should be inspected for chipped, damaged or missing teeth, and excessive rack -to-gear wear. The leg rack 
lower terminus should also be NDT tested for fractures at each dry- docking. The legs 
should also be inspected for significant creases, dents and deflections that may increase the rack to gear clearance and potentially allow the gear to free wheel, and cause the vessel to descend uncontrollably.  
 
############
 4. Leg Removal and Inspection Intervals  
 Liftboat companies should have in place a fleet -wide plan adequately addressing the 
preventive maintenance and c orrective measures for each vessel’s legs, pads and jacking 
systems. At a minimum, the following items should be addressed in the plan.  
a. Leg Inspection Cycles and Maintenance – while legs are installed, the legs should be visually inspected annually. Th e legs should be examined for significant creases, 
dents and deflections . Note that exceptionally long legs fitted with a single rack 
system may have slight deflection over the length of the le g during extreme 
temperatures. The leg rack and pinion should be checked for missing or damaged teeth and fractures. When visual examination warrants, additional/more detailed inspections should be conducted.  In addition to the annual visual inspection, at every five (5) year dry- dock cycle, the legs and jacking comp onents should be  inspected as 
described below. If the Coast Guard marine inspector determines that the legs cannot be inspected adequately while installed, they should then be removed to facilitate examinations. 
 
(1) The below list is the minimum recommend ed inspections and maintenance of 
liftboat jacking system components to be conducted by Coast Guard marine inspectors at 5 and 10- year intervals for those vessels operated on exposed wate rs 
routes (Coastwise, Oceans). The following is a best industry pract ice developed in 
consensus with representatives of the Offshore Marine Service Association (OMSA) Liftboats Subcommittee. Vessels operated exclusively on protected 
waters (L,  B &S) are not subject to routine removal of the legs for inspection and 
should re peat the 5 year inspection items, unless the marine inspector determines  
       that it is necessary to pull legs based upon other inspecti on results or observed 
damage. The recommended cycle for pulling of legs should normally commence 
when the vessel i s 10 years old from the delivery date with the first recommended 
leg removal normally occurring 20 years fr om the vessel’s delivery date. 
However, the marine inspector may determine that it is necessary to remove a liftboat’s  leg(s) at any time based upon other inspection results or observed 
damage, if he or she determines it is necessary to assure a vessel’s safety or seaworthiness.  
 (2) Five (5) & ten (10) year liftboat leg inspections should be documented on the 
vessel’s COI to show “last completed” for each leg.  
 (3) Five (5) Year Drydock Inspection Items  
 
(a) Rack – Visually inspect rack length equal to twice tower height, but not 
less than 20 feet above tower and one  random location (rack must be free 
of all coatings). If unable to make the required length available for 
inspection, then the owner or operator should provide an alternative 
inspection plan.  
 
(b) Rack Butts – Clean and inspect (NDT required) rack end butt s on all legs.  
 
(c) Pinion – Inspect pinion and adjust (as needed) pinion to rack clearance, 
and record results.  
 
(d) Gearbox Oil – Draw oil sample/analyze from ever y gearbox, and record 
results.  
 (e) Gearbox Disassembly – Disassemble and inspect lower -most gearbox per 
leg; additional inspection based on results.  
 
############
(f) Bearings – Bearing and cap inspection on gearbox pulled for disassembly; 
additional inspection based on results. 
 (g) Brakes – Inspect brake assembly of pulled gearbox per leg; additional inspection based on results.  
 (h) Tower Guides – Inspect tower and rack guide’s clearances, and compare with manufacturers recommendations. 
 (i) Leg to Pad Connection – Clean and NDT all leg to pad connection welds; 
evaluate connection integrity.  
 
(j) Hydraulic Hoses – Replace all external hydraulic jacking system hoses that are exposed to weather.  
 
(4) Ten (10) Year Drydock Inspection Items  
 
(a) Rack - Conduct visual inspection and NDT of entire rack length, rack must be 
free of al l coatings, record com pletion. Conduct NDT of rack to leg welds, 
entire length of rack and record results.  
 (b) Rack Butts -  Clean and inspect (NDT required) rack end butts on all legs.  
 (c) Pinion – Check and adjust (as needed) pinion to rack clearance, and record results.  
 (d) Gearbox Oil – Draw oil sample and analyze from every gearbox, and record results.  
 (e) Gearbox Disassembly – Disassemble and inspect lower and uppermost gearbox on each leg inspection based on results.  
 (f) Bearings – inspect bearings and caps on gearbox es pulled for disassembly; 
additional inspection based on results. 
 
(g) Brakes – Pull and inspect two brake assemblies on gearboxes pulled for disassembly; additional inspection based on results. 
 (h) Tower Guides -  Inspect tower and rack guide’s clearances, and compare wit h 
manufacturers recommendations.  
 (i) Tower Roundness – Inspect tower roundness at several locations to ensure within manufacturer tolerances.  
 (j) Tower Thickness – Evaluate tower wall thickness by conducting grid on tower using NDT (UT), and record results.  
 (k) Leg to Pad Connection - Clean and NDT all leg to pad connection welds; 
evaluate connection integrity.  
 (l) Pad Plate Thickness – Evaluate pad shell plate thickness by performing UT grid; inspect all plug welds. 
 (m) Hydraul ic Hoses – R eplace all external hydraulic jacking system hoses in 
locations  exposed to weather . 
 
(n) Legs External – Clean entire leg of coatings, NDT all legs butt weld joints, 
and record completion. Conduct UT of leg plate thickness in minimum of four 
(4) places, and record results.  
 (o) Legs Inter nal – Remove pan from leg, visually inspect all leg internals, ladder 
points, butt welds, etc.; if visual inspection reveals areas of concern, appropriate means of non destructive testing should be utilized to further inspect these areas.  
 
b. Leg Removal Cycles – The leg removal cycles should start ten (10) years from the 
vessel’s delivery date with the first leg removal/examinations occurring, under normal circumstances, at a scheduled drydocking approximately tw enty (20) years 
from delivery. 
 
(1) After twenty (20) years from delivery, the legs should be removed not less than once every t en (10) years for examination.  
 (2) If the legs are removed before the recommended interval; for any reason, such as 
repair, each removed leg may be given removal credit and another ten- year cycle 
started, provided the “10 year” inspections described in paragraph 1.a.4 above, are 
completed. 
 
############
(3) Credit for removal should be annotated on the vessel’s Certificate of Inspection 
(COI).  
 
(4) Those vessels operating exclusively on protected routes (Lakes, Bays, and 
Sounds) are generally accepted for leg removal, unless circumstances dic tate their 
removal for repair.  
 
(5) When the legs are removed for their 10 year inspection cycle, the  entire rack, rack 
lower terminus, all leg butt welds, and leg to can connection should be cleaned or degreased prior to inspection. The owner should then perform inspections as outlined in paragraph 1.a.4, above, a nd provide reports and any  third party re sults 
to the attending marine inspector.  
 (6) If a vessel has a delivery date greater than twenty (20) years prior to the effective date of M arch 4, 2008, (date of original CG- 543 Policy Letter 07-02, now 
integrated in to the MSM.), and the owner cannot provide documentation confirming the legs have been pulled and inspected as outlined above, then the legs should be pulled and inspected before the end of current drydock cycle, or at  
       a maximum  within five (5) years.  
 
 
5. Legs, Jackhouses, and S upport S tructures  
 
These features are extremely critical to the safe operation of liftboats and should receive 
careful attention durin g drydock and structural exams.  
 
a. Legs should be si ghted to detect any deflection.  
 b. All significant creases and den ts should be marked for insert.  
 c. Rack and pinion assemblies should be examined for tears, fractures, and broken teeth. Most boats employ a single rack system. Consequently, the side opposite the rack is  
subject to extreme wear due to rubbing on the jacking guide. Wear -down of as much 
as 50  percent of the original scantlings is known to have existed. This area should be 
subject to UT examination for the full length of the leg.  
 
d. When original scantlings  are determined from approved plans, each leg should be 
verified a s meeting the stated thickness.  Wastage limits are addressed in part B -6 of 
this Chapter.  
 
e. If evidence indicates that liftboat legs may have been fabricated undersized, despite 
what was i ndicated on the builders ’ drawings , the owner or operator should provide 
calculations that the as -built legs. Consult MSC for assistance  if needed. Also, legs on 
existing vessels may have been lengthened after original build and could be 
considered suspect . It is recommended , in this case, that consideration be given to 
employing x- ray examination of butt welds to verify that  full penetration was 
achieved.  
 
f. The leg to pad connections and condition of the pads themselves are also critical due 
to the relatively light scantlings for the amount of loading they are subject to. Careful 
inspection of the footings is critical to e nsure that they remain watertight. ND T may 
be necessary to evaluate these connections.  
 g. On some vessels, the j acking guide to hull attachments may be subject to tearing 
problems. Where this is in evidence, retrofit , and possible redesign of the weld should 
be discussed with the owner . Addi tionally, condition and attachment of headers and 
supporting structure should be verified. Information about lamellar tearing is available in the Ship Structure Committee Report SSC -290. Copies of this report may 
be obtained from the Secretary, Ship Struct ure Committee, or Commandant (CG-
ENG) . 
 h. Leg-To-Tower Clearance -  Each designer and builder specifies a particular leg -to- 
       tower  clearance range for proper operation of the vessel’s leg and jacking system; too 
tight and the system may bind, too loose and the system may wobble or cause 
improper rack- pinion operation. This clearance may deviate from one vessel class to 
another, however; it is important that the clearance be checked in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s guidelines  and compared to the recommended range. When the 
clearance falls out of the recommended range, the owner/operator should present a 
proposal to bring this clea rance back to the builder’s or designer’s specifications.  
 
############
 
6. Hydraulic J acking S ystems 
 Hydraulic system jacking failures have been the cause of a number of liftboat casualties. 
Inspection guidance ( NVIC 8 -91) provides that systems must be modified as necessar y to 
ensure they are fail -safe. 
 
a. There are two types of systems installed on liftboats, open loop or closed loop. Open loop systems are arranged with all the legs supplied in series. Closed loop systems serve each leg individually. Both systems employ a common reservoir. Flow from the reservoir through the pumps to the manifolds is directed by three -way valve 
controlled from the bridge. The planetary brakes are spring loaded and, theoretically, activate when they sense loss of fluid pressure. However, in some previous cases, upon component failure, the brakes did not sense loss of flui d and the vessels fell 
rapidly.  
 b. This problem may be remedied in several ways, the most common being the installation of compensating and check valves into the systems. It is the responsibility of the owner to propose an acceptable design.  
 c. Material condit ion of the manifolds, hoses, planetaries, couplings, and pinions should 
be carefully checked as well as any system modifications.  
 d. Whe n the systems are tested, physical breaks should be made upstream  and 
downstr eam of the compensating valves.  
 e. Additionally, leg controls in the wheel house should be of the "dead man" type only. A number of accidents have occurred because the operators activated a fixed position switc h and walked away from the consoles.  
 
(1) The following jacking system components should be maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations:  
  
(a) fluid levels;  
 
(b) hydraulic piping and hoses;  
 
(c) pump drive shaft assembly;  
 
(d) jacking system controls;  
 (e) jacking system pressure;  
 (f) gearbox assembly; and 
 (g) bearings.  
  
(2) Vessel owners should demonstrate the installed hydraulic jacking system complies with the requirement of 46 CFR Subchapter F (46 CFR 58.30). 
 (3) Owners of vessels certificated under subchapter L o r I may provide approved 
plans.  
 (4) Owners of vessels certificated under the guidance of NVIC 8 -91 should 
demonstrate substantial  compliance with 46 CFR 58.30 and that the system i s 
“fail-safe”. Often during initial certification, these vessels were held to varying 
standards and may not “substantia lly” comply with Subchapter F. 
 (5) Jacking system hydraulic review should be submitted to ensure fail –safe systems, including counter -balance valves and motor brakes.  
 (6) Installed hydraulic fittings/hoses/piping should be  demonstrated to be adequate 
for the rated system pressure and comply with the applicable regulations and 
guidance.  Inspectors should check systems for agreement with the drawings and 
parts list. This review should include a basic line drawing and component list to 
the satisfaction of the attending marine inspector.  Once completed, a copy of the review and associated drawings should be inserted into the vessel’s approved operating manual.  
 
 
7. Engineering Related Systems  
 
a. Bilge Alarm Sensors. Should be located in all engineering and machinery spaces. An 
audible and visual alarm for each space should be provided in the pil othouse and be 
properly marked. No device should be inst alled to disable these alarms.  
 b. Engine Overspeeds. Engine overspeed devices on all pre -46 CFR Subchapter L  prime 
movers are “ grandfathered”. If installed, however; they should operate properly.  
 
############
c. Ventilation Shutdown.  All power ventilation equipment, heat pumps and other such 
devices used in hotel services should have appropriate shutdowns.  Natural vents 
connected to the engine room and deckhouse should have weather -tight closures that 
are appropriately marked, “Close in Case of Fire”.  
 d. Level Alarm. All liftboats not inspected in accordance with 46 CFR Subchapter L should be fitted with a level alarm in accordance with NVIC 8 -91 consisting of a 
distinct alarm that sounds at the main operating station to indicate an out -of –level 
condition or uneven leg sinkage in the vessel’s elevated condition.  
 
e. Low Hyd raulic Oil Level Alarm. All liftboats should be f itted with an audible and 
visual alarm at the main operating station that indicates a loss  in hydraulic oil level in 
the main jacking system.  
 
f. Shaft Speed. An indicator providing the propeller shaft speed should be available to 
the operator in the pilot house. Shaft speed indication may be obtained via:  
 
(1) an engine tachometer with corresponding “shaf t sheets” that convert engine RPM 
to shaft RPM or  
 
(2) a separate shaft tachometer.  
 
 
8. Steel Wastage Allowance  
 
Lift boats are weight -sensitive  vessels and experience maximum hull stresses when elevated 
since they are only supported at each end of the vessel, compared to a conventional vessel which has its hull supported by buoyancy distributed along its  length. Historically, liftboats 
have been built with the objective of keeping both leg weight and overhull weight to a minimum. The desire to reduce weight in the past led to many older liftboats to be built with reduced scantlings when compared to c onventional hulls of the time. 
 
a. For newer liftboats, built in accordance with approved 46 CFR Subchapter L plans , 
the wastage allowance can follow current standards; however  
 b. for olde r (non -Subchapter L) liftboats, evaluation should be based  on more 
conservative allowances unless structural analyses  demonstrate that greater wastages 
can be safely tolerated.  
 c. Most older vessels were  built using the American Bureau of Shipping’s (ABS)   
       MODU Rules and the referenced ABS Steel Barge rules.  
 
d. In the case where they were not built to these  standards, it was often trial and error 
until the vessel was found to be sturdy enough to satisfactorily meet the service demands. These vessels were  not built with  Coast Guard  oversight or approved plans 
and the approved section modulus/leg strength calc ulations and associated structural 
analysis may not be  available.  
 e. The thickness utilized for evaluation of hull wastage should be the actual plate thickness on board the vessel compared to the approved thickness. In some cases, thicker plate was used during construction when compared to the thickness required by ABS ’ Rules or otherwise approved. As a result, more wastage may be seen on a 
particular “over scantling’ vessel, while still within tolerance of the approved plans. Use the following guidelines for liftboat categories when determining appropriate 
wastage allowances:  
 
(1) Vessels built to  46 CFR Subchapter L or I standards with approved plans – Allow 
25% wastage in accordance with NVIC 7 -68. 
 (2) Vessels built without approved plans – Allow 20% wastage for ¼” or thicker steel 
hull or deck plating in accordance with ABS 1973 MODU and Steel Barge rules.  Allow 10% wastage for 3/16” or thinner steel hull or deck plating in accordance with ABS 1973 MODU and Steel Barge rule s. 
 (3) Vessels built without approved plans but having a Professional Engineering (P.E.) 
– provided section modulus and strength calculations – Allow maximum wastage as per calculations, but in no case allow more than 25%.  Guidance for the 
acceptance of P.E. certifications can be found in NVIC 10 -92 Ch. 2. 
 
############
 
9. Tailshaft Inspection Intervals and Examinations  
 
a. Liftboa ts less than 100 GT (domestic) are not normally required to pull tail shafts for 
examination unless deemed necessary  by the marine inspector or unless necessary to 
determine the co ndition of the shaft bearings.  
 b. Liftboats of 100 GT or more will be required to undergo tail shaft examinations in 
accordance with the appropriate regulations. Proper tail shaft /propeller fit -up are  
necessary to eliminate or minimize d amage due to excessive  vibration.  
 c. An owner/ operator may  prove proper fit -up by many methods, including bluing, 
micrometer readings and others. The owner is responsible for proper fit -up of the 
vessel’s tai l shaft.  
 10. Lifesaving Policy  
 
a. Rescue Boat  – Unlike  conventional vessels, liftboats operate in both elevated and 
afloat modes of operation. Therefore, liftboats must be able to recover a helpless 
person from the water in both the elevated and afl oat modes. Since a liftboat cannot 
serve as its own “rescue platform” while elevated, each liftboat  must have at least one 
rescue boat. If no launching device is  provided, on vessels with two cranes, the rescue 
boat must be capable of being launched with either crane.  Approval of crane 
launching of the rescue boat on vessels with only one crane is at the discretion of  the 
OCMI. A crane that is  used to launch a res cue boat should b e certified for personnel 
transfer . All pre -Subchapter L rescue boats should be equipped with safety equipment 
to the satis faction of the cognizant OCMI. However, at a minimum, these pre -
Subchapter L rescue boats should have the following  safety equipment and quantities 
(#):  paddles (2), heaving lines (2), sponges (2), boat hooks (1) , and bailer (1). All 
Subchapter L rescue boats must be outfitted with the equipment described in 46 CFR 
133.175. 
 
(1) A motor -propelled workboat or launch may be used in place of the required 
rescue boat if the embarkation and recovery arrangements of 46 CFR 133.160 (a), 
(c), (d), (e) and (f) are met, if shown to be at least as effective.  
 
(2) While liftboats may be allowed to use the installed cranes to launch  rescue boats 
in lieu of an installed davit, stability concerns and the vessel’s operating manual normally prohibit the use of the cranes while the vessel is afloat.  
 
(3) While in the afloat mode, cranes should only be used to launch and recover the rescue boat if the vessel’s operating manual permits use of t he crane(s) in the 
afloat mode.  
 (4) Also, while in the afloat mode, and in accordance with 46 CFR 133.135, the 
OCMI may determine if  the vessel is arranged to allow a helpless person to be 
recovered from the water, provided the recovery can be viewed from the 
navigation bridge and the vessel does not regularly  engage in operations which 
restrict its maneuverability.   However, if this requirement cannot be met, 
vessels with an efficient and reliable method for providing two way communications between a person at the side of the vessel and the person at the helm may be considered equivalent to 46 CFR 133.135, if shown to be at least as eff ective.  
 (5) Depending on the vessel’s hull design, this may be accomplished in several ways.  Older vessels have leg pads that retract up to the hull and are exposed when underway. These leg pads can be used as a platform to rescue a helpless person if a suitable means is installed to access the pad and to transfer the helpless person  
        from the pad to the main deck. 
 (6) On many newer vessels, the pad is submerged while underway, and a separate platform  should be provided. T hese platforms may vary based upon hull design, 
and it is the OCMI’s discretion to judge the platform to be fit to recover a h elpless 
person from the water.  
 (7) A rescue harness should also be provided, regardless of rescue  platform type. 
 
############
b. Lifesaving Systems -  Previously approved lifesaving appliances or arrangements are 
acceptable.  The regulations in 46 CFR 133.10 should be consulted when changes are made to lifesav ing equipment or arrangements. 
 c. Embarkation Devices – It is a long standing industry practice to instal l knotted 
“manropes” on liftboats for emerg ency disembarkation as a partial means to meet the 
intent of an embar kation ladder (Jacob’s ladder).  These knotted manropes are 
generally considered accep table as an alternative to traditional embarkation ladders as 
required by 46 C FR 133.110, on liftboats only. If a knotted manrope is installed, it 
should be long enough to reach the water at the liftboat’s highest elevated position, and be examined at least annually by the vessel’s crew. Excessively soiled, worn or 
frayed ropes or ropes with cracked  or corroded attachments should be replaced or 
repaired  immediately.  
 
 
11. Firefighting and Alarm Equipment  
 
a. Firemain  and Raw Water Suctions  - Firemain , bilge, and ballast systems should be 
capable of operation at all times, including in elevated mode. When it is practical to 
do so, the fire main should be tested in the elevated mode. 
 
b. Fire Pumps  - All liftboats must have an installed fire pump, its output is regulated 
under the appropriate subchapter and capable  of operation at all times , including the 
elevated mode. The typical fire pump installation is a submersible type, mounted on the main deck, and connected to the fire main system through a flexible hose. These hoses should be routinely inspected for condit ion and serviceability . The launch 
appliance for lowering the pump into the water should be inspected for proper operation and condition.  
 
c. Smoke  Alarms  - Each  separate living space and galley should have a smoke alarm.  
Smoke alarms may be battery power ed, independent type units, and all should have a 
test button to indicate proper operation. 
 
 
12. General Operations  
 a. Operating  Manual – All liftboats  should have an operating manual onboard which  is 
approved by the OCMI .  This manual should include, at a minimum, those items required 
by 46 CFR 134.170. 
 
b. Dead  Man Switch – The liftboat jacking system should incorporate a “dead man” 
feature at  the system controls, which requires a physical force from the operator 
(through hand and or foot pedal) be applied to the controls in order for the system to 
function. Once the applied force is remove d, the vessel’s jacking stops. Often , this  is 
done through use of spring- loaded foot pedal or hand toggle switches.  
 c. Anemometer – If the liftboat’s approved operating manual specifies required actions based upon wind speed, the vessel should have a reliable means to determine wind speed such as a properly operating anemometer (portable or fixed) onboard. 
 
d. Anchors  – Anchors should be installed on all liftboats in accordance w ith the 
applicable subchapter. “Grandfathered” liftboats may use  existing vessel anchors.  
Standards set forth in ABS rules, utilizing  first principle calculations, may be used to 
determin e the appropriate anchor size. Liftboats are restricted in their routes through 
their approved operating manual to water depths that do not exceed th e vessel’s 
ability to jack up. However, if a liftboat  loses steering  or propulsion in river current 
the liftboat may travel a significant distance before the legs can be jacked down to 
stop the vessel, which may cause serious damage to nearby vessels; or the vessel may 
incur damage to the legs by suddenly stopping the vessel utiliz ing legs as emergency 
anchors. The anchors are considered emergency anchoring systems and should be 
ready for use at any time. 
 
############
 
13. Cranes  
a. Pedestal mounted c ranes installed on OSVs, MODUs, and floating OCS facilities 
having a l ifting capacity exceeding 5 net tons (10,000 lbs), used for purposes other 
than special purpose (e.g., lifting fuel hoses, handling ship supplies), should be designed in accordance with the latest edition of API Specification 2C, Offshore Pedestal -Mounted Cranes, incorporated by reference in the regulations at the time of 
the vessel's construction or other design standard considered equivalent by the Office of Design and Engineering (CG -ENG)  (Ref: 46 CFR 108.101 and 108.601). 
 
b. Cranes meeting the requirement s in paragraph (a) should be operated and maintained 
in accordance with the latest edition of API Recommended Practice 2D, Operation and Maintenance of Offshore Cranes, incorporated by reference in the current regulations. Cranes, other than those addresse d in paragraph (a), should be operated, 
and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations (Ref: 46  
  
CFR 109.105 and 109.521) . 
 
 
14. R oute Restrictions  
 Route restrictions  placed on the COI of a  liftboat should be taken directly from  the vessels 
stability letter. See  NVIC 8 -91 for guidance on the route restrictions for liftboats operating 
both inside and outsi de the Boundary Line. After reviewing pertinent stability calculations, 
the Marine Safety Center (MSC) will issue a stability letter which specifies route restrictions in 3 categories:  
 
a. Unrestricted  Operations – When all provisions of 46 CFR 174 Subpart C a re met, 
within the full range of leg positions encountered while jacking. The stability letter 
will define the area of oper ation  approved.  
 b. Restricted Operations Beyond the Boundary Line – restricted to service within twelve 
(12) hours of a harbor of safe refuge or l ocation where the vessel may elevate to 
survive 100 knots of wind. 
 c. Restricted  Operations Inside  the Boundary Line –  restricted operations inside the 
Boundary Line, within eight (8) hours of  a harbor of saf e refuge or location where the 
vessel may elevate to survive 100 knots of wind. 
 
 
15. Manning  
 
For guidance on the minimum safe manning for liftboats  see Marine Safety Manual, Volume 
III, Marine Industry Personnel, COMDINST M16000.8B (series), Chapter 21 (Part B, Vessel 
Manning, Chapter 2, Sample Vessel Manning Scales , Section L, Offshore Supply Vessels 
(OSVs) ).   
 
 
16. Domestic Voyage Person nel Carriage Allowance 
 
A liftboat may carry no more than 36 offshore workers when certificated under 46 CFR 
Subchapter L. In order to facilitate the industry need to carry persons in addition to the crew, 
who are engaged in the business of the vessel, a l iftboat may be inspected under the authority 
of 46 CFR Subchapter  I, with the unique characteristics of self -elevating units  being 
addressed by Subchapter L. In such instances, authorization may be provided on a case –by case basis, for certification to carry more than 36 industrial personnel as defined in 46 CFR Subchapter I.  This approach is similar to that used in the past to bring liftboats into  
certification, as described in NVIC 8 -91. 
  
17. International Voyages  
 
############
To engage in international voyages, a liftboat must meet the applicable SOLAS requirements 
and have all appropriate SOLAS documentation.  The SOLAS standard for cargo ships is 
acceptable for this purpose. Not more than 12 passengers (as defined by SOLAS) are 
author ized on international voyages.  
 
 
18. Security  
 
All vessels shall adhere to their approved Vessel Security Plans; see 33 CFR Subchapter H, 
Parts 101, 103, and 104, as appropriate. Liftboats engaged in international voyages must 
meet the International Ship & Port Facility  Security  Code (ISPS), as applicable, Chapter XI -2 
of SOLAS.  
 
 
C. DRILLING TENDERS  
 
 
1. Inspection procedures  
 
Drilling t enders are vessels which are typically engaged in providing material, power, 
machinery, manpower , and accommodations offshore. Such vessels are normally anchored 
for several months at a time at an offshore platform. Some of these vessels are propelled by mechanical m eans and some are not. As a U.S. Flagged vessel, t hey are inspected and 
certificated under 46 CFR Subchapter I.  
 2. Drydocking  
 
These vessels are drydocked according to the regulations in 46 CFR Subchapter I. Special considerations  may be given to stern tube and tailshaft bearing extension requests due to 
recognition of their limited amount of time underway. These requests should be made , in 
writing , by the owner, and should be forwarded to Commandant ( CG-CVC), via the District  
office, together with the recommendation of the OCMI. 
 
 
D. CREWBOATS  
 
 
1. Exemption from Tank Vessel Requirements  
 Oil and mineral industry support crew boats certified under 46 CFR Subchapter T are included in the statutory (46 U.S.C  3702 b)) exemption from the tank vessel requirements 
allowing transfer of excess vessel fuel to drilling and production facilities if  they are not 
more than 500 GT; not a tanker; and in the service of oil exploration.  
 
 
2. Fuel Transfers  
 
Fuel transfers f rom crewboats certified under 46 CFR Subchapt er T should be conducted 
with only the  vessel’s crew on board (n o offshore workers, industrial personnel , passengers, 
etc.) 
 
 
3. COI  
 
The following language may be placed on crew boat Certificates of Inspection (COI):  
 “When engaged in the service of oil/gas exploitation, vessel is allowed to transfer excess fuel from its own fuel tanks to oil/gas drilling and production facilities.  No passengers, offshore workers, industrial personnel , pers ons in addition to the crew or individuals other than the 
crew shall remain on board during transfers of excess fuel t o oil/gas drilling and production 
facilities .” 
 
 
E. OFFSHORE RENEWABLE ENER GY INSTALLATIONS (OREI)  
 
NVIC 02 -07 provides guidance on information and factors the Coast Guard shall consider when 
reviewing an application for a permit to build and operate an Offshore Renewable Energy Installation (OREI) in the navigable waters of the  United States. The Circular identifies 
 information to consider when evaluating the potential impacts of an OREI which will assist  in 
providing valuable input to the B ureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) and 
Bureau of Ocean Management (BOEM) or another lead permitting agency for environmental  
review  and decision making purposes. 
 
############
 
1. Per 33 CFR 140.10; an OCS activity means any offshore activity associated with exploration for, or development or production of, the minerals of the Outer Continental Shelf.  
 2. Notwithstanding the above definition, certain offshore renewable energy installations are now covered by leasing a rrangements approved by BSEE. The Coast Guard does not 
view OREIs as  an OCS activity based on the definition of “minerals”. Presently this 
definition has not been expanded t o include “alternative energy source ” such as wind.  
 3. As such, the manning requirements found in 33 CFR 141 do  not apply to OREIs . 
 
 
F. ACCOMODATION SERVICE VESSELS  
 
Accommodation service vessels (ASV or “Flotels”) are subject to U.S. Coast Guard regulatory jurisdiction. Concurrent with the legal determination of the Outer Continental Shelf Land Act (OCSLA), “The Coast Guard has authority to regulate accommodation vessels if they are engaged in activities to support a unit attached to the OCS seabed for the purpose of exploration, development or production.”   
 Units that are considered to be performing accommodation services are subject to OCSLA and therefore 33 CFR Subchapter N, because such units are engaged in activities to support exploration, development or production.  
 U.S. flag vessels or units engaged in ASV activities are subject to CG inspection regime and other regulatory authority, as the Flag State.  
 For fo reign  flag vessels or units, under Subchapter “N” 33 CFR 140.101(a), units engaged 
in OCS activities are subject to inspection by the CG.  Additionally, 33 CFR 140.101(e) allows for the inspection of foreign flag units to validate the international certificates they possess. At this time, unless the vessel is certificated additionally as a MODU or floating facility, lack of current published regulations do not allow for the vessel to get a Certificate of Compliance (COC).  
 Currently, U.S. units are subj ect to all the Flag State requirements when they are issued a 
Certificate of Inspection (COI), and foreign flag units solely performing accommodation operations are limited to validation of the existing international certificates onboard that 
 are accepted by the U.S. including SOLAS, Loadline, MARPOL, and IMO Code to include 
MODU and SPS if issued.  
 If an accommodation service vessel embarked passengers in a U.S. port or visited a U.S. port with U.S. citizens as passengers, then 46 U.S.C. 3505 would apply and the vessel would 
need to hold a Passenger Safety  and Security Certificate (PSSC) and obtain a COC.  That 
would include plan review and inspection.   If such a vessel remained offshore and other 
boats or aircraft ferried passengers out to the ASV on location, 46 U.S.C. 3505 would not apply.  
 
 G O
THER FOREIGN FLAG VESSELS WORKING ON THE U.S.  OCS  
 Foreign vessels become subject to a Coast Guard Port State Control Examination  once they enter 
U.S. territorial waters . This is to ensure that foreign vessels operating in U.S. waters provide  an 
acceptable level of safety.  
 Such vessels may be eligible for examination reciprocity in accordance with the provisions of 46 U.S.C. 3303. If, after reviewing certificates, it is determined that a vessel is not eligible for reciprocity, then an examination of the vessel should be conducted to determine compliance w ith 
the applicable regulations.  
 The U.S. Customs service , now Customs Border Patrol (CBP), has ruled that the carriage of 
merchandise or passengers between a point in the United States and a facility on the U.S. OCS is considered Coastwise Trade, and in accordance with  the Jones Act, only vessels licensed , or 
vessels otherwise qualified , may engage in such activity.  
 In practice, this means that foreign 
vessels on the OCS may perform service functions but not supply functions (carriage of 
merchandise and /or  passengers as defined above).  
 
############
 