MARINE SAFETY: CARRIAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS COMDTINST 16000.75  

 
A. INTRODUCTION  
 
The Coast Guard's concerns for hazardous materials safety include those solids, liquids, 
and gases (liquefied or under pressure) that are dangerous to human life and property.  
For purposes of hazard classification, hazardous materials are divided into th ree main 
categories: bulk liquids and liquefied gases, packaged cargoes, and bulk solids.  
The phrase "carried in bulk" refers to a commodity that is loaded or carried aboard a vessel without containers or labels and received and handled without mark or c ount.  
 
 
B. DEFINITIONS  
 
 1. Hazardous Materials  
 
The definition of hazardous materials depends on whether packaged or bulk cargoes are involved.  In 49 CFR 171.8, a hazardous material is defined as “a substance or material that the Secretary of Transportation has determined is capable of posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property when transported in commerce, and has designated as hazardous under section 5103 of Federal hazardous mate rials transportation law (49 
U.S.C. 5103). The term includes hazardous substances, hazardous wastes, marine pollutants, elevated temperature materials, materials designated as hazardous in the Hazardous Materials Table (see 49 CFR 172.101), and materials t hat meet the defining 
criteria for hazard classes and divisions in P art 173 of S ubchapter C of this C hapter .”  
This is a very broad definition. I t includes many commodities that may not be allowed for 
shipment in bulk.  
 
 
2. Bulk Materials 
 
a. For the purpose of bulk transportation, 46 U.S.C. 2101(14) defines a hazardous 
material as “ any liquid material or substance that is --  
 
(1) Flammable or combustible;  
 (2) Designated a hazardous substance under Section 311(b) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (FWPCA), as amended (33 U.S.C. 1321); or  
 (3) Designated a hazardous material under section 5103(a) of title 49 [U.S.C.] .” 
 b. See 46 CFR 153.40 for a listing of materials the Coast Guard has found to be hazardous when transported in bulk under this authority. 


 
C. CONTROL OF PRODUCT SHIPMENT  
 
 
1. Bulk Hazardous Liquids, Liquefied Gases, and Solids  
 
The regulations for shipments of bulk and packaged hazardous substances differ in terms of how  a product may be shipped.  Before a material may be shipped in bulk, it must be 
evaluated by the Hazardous Materials Standards Division, Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5).  
The Hazardous Materials Standards Division, Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5), determines 
whether the material in question may be shipped in bulk and, if so, the conditions of shipment.  A  bulk hazardous material that is not listed as regulated may still be prohibited 
from bulk shipment.  
 
 
2. Products Shipped as Packaged Cargoes  
 
Products shipped as packaged cargoes  are evaluated by the shipper, who should select the 
proper shipping name from 49 CFR , Part 172, Subpart B .  The package rules state that a 
material that does not fit under any of the shipping names in 49 CFR Part 172, Subpart B, may be shipped under a  "Not Otherwise S pecified " (N.O.S.) categor y unless the 
regulations prohibit its shipment .  
 
############
 
3. Evaluation of New Bulk Liquid Cargoes  
 
Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5) evaluates new liquid cargoes proposed for bulk shipment 
under the Criteria for Hazard Evaluation of Bulk Chemicals.  The criteria include 
flammability, toxicity, reactivity, and corrosiv eness.   The Criteria for Hazard Evaluation 
of Bulk Chemicals  are contained in the International Maritime Organization (IMO) Code 
for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Da ngerous Chemicals in Bulk, 
Resolution A.212 (latest edition).  Cargoes that are only hazardous in regards to flammability are regulated under 46 CFR Subchapter D.  Cargoes with  hazards in 
addition to or other than flammability are regulated under 46 CFR Parts 150- 154.  
 
 
4. Department of Transportation (DOT) Review  
 
Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5) evaluat es solids carried in bulk (i.e., in cargo holds rather 
than in some type of container), ships' stores, cargoes under fumigation, bulk liquids, and 
liquefied gases) .  Hazardous Materials Standards Division, Commandant (CG -ENG- 5), 
maintains t he 46 CFR regulations concerning bulk liquids, liquefied gases, and bulk 
solids .  The DOT Office of Hazardous Materials Transportation (OHMT) oversees the 
evaluation of packaged materials and their regulation under Title 49 CFR.  Military explosives are regulated under 46 CFR Part 146. 


 
5. Communications with Commandant (CG -OES ) 
 
As new products are added almost daily, any published list of authorized cargoes is quickly outdated.  To resolve any doubt about a particular material, contact Commandant (CG-ENG- 5).  If the cargo is a liquid or liquefied gas to be shipped in bulk or a bulk solid 
under Title 46 CFR, call Commandant (CG -ENG- 5) at 202- 372-1401  If the material is to 
be shipped as a packaged cargo under Title 49 CFR, call Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5) at 
202-372-1401.  Division personnel may be reached from 0700- 1530 Eastern time, 
Monday- Friday. Should a question arise during nonworking hours, a representative of 
Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5) can be contacted through Headquarters Flag Plot at (202) 
 
 
6. IMO Review  
 
Within the IMO --  
 
a. The IMO Subcommittee on Bulk Chemicals (BCH) is responsible for the IMO Bulk Chemical Code and Gas Codes;  
 b. The Subcommittee on the Carriage of Dangerous Goods (CDG) is responsible for packaged cargoes and for the IMO International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) Code;  
 c. The Subcommittee on Containers and Cargoes (BC) deals with bulk solids.  
 
NOTE:  See Figur e F1-1 for a summary of references concerning hazardous 
materials safety.  


 
D. STATUTORY AUTHORITY  
 
The Secretary of DOT ( SECDOT ) regulates the transportation of hazardous materials 
under two statutes: the HMTA ( 49 U.S.C. 1801- 1812)  and Title II of Title 46, U.S.C. 
These statutes apply to foreign and U.S. vessels in U.S. waters.  Under the authority delegated by the SECDOT, the Coast Guard administers and enforces the laws and regulations for the safe maritime transportation of hazardous materials.  Un der the 
HMTA, the Director of the OHMT is authorized to issue regulations for package shipments of hazardous materials. The Coast Guard advises the OHMT on the development  of these regulations and enforces them, but may not permit exemptions 
from them.  The Ports and Waterways Safety Act (PWSA), as amended, makes the Coast Guard responsible for the safety of waterfront facilities that handle hazardous materials.  
See MSM Volume II, Material Inspection, COMDTINST M16000.7A (series), Chapter  
B8 for a gene ral discussion of facility inspections.  
 
############
 
USCG Marine Safety Manual, Vol. II: Materiel Inspection 
 
SECTION F:  CARRIAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS  
 
CHAPTER F1:  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY 
 
 
 
FIGURE F1 -1: SUMMARY OF INFORMATION CONCERNING THE HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY PROGRAM  
 
 Bulk Liquids and 
Liquefied Gases Packaged Cargoes, 
Including Portable 
Tanks  Bulk Solids  Fumigation  Ship s' Stores  
COGNIZANT 
SECTION G-MSO  Bulk Cargo  Packaged Cargo  Bulk Cargo  Bulk Cargo  Bulk Cargo  
AGENCY WITH 
AUTHORITY  Coast Guard  Office of Hazardous 
Materials 
Transportation 
(OHMT)  Coast Guard  Coast Guard  Coast Guard  
APPLICABLE LAWS 33 U.S.C. 1221  
46 U.S.C. Chapter  
37 49 U.S.C. 1801  33 U.S.C. 1221  
49 U.S.C. 1801 49 U.S.C. 1801  46 U.S.C. 3306  
46 U.S.C. 4105 
46 U.S.C. 4302  
APPLICABLE 
REGULATIONS  33 CFR Subch apter  
O 
46 CFR 
Subchapters D & O  46 CFR Parts 64,  
98, and 146 
49 CFR Parts 171-
179 46 CFR Part 148  46 CFR Part 147a  46 CFR Parts 147 
and 194 
CORRESPONDING 
INTERNATIONAL 
CODE OR 
CONVENTION  IMO Bulk Chemical 
Code (Res. A.212)  
Gas Carrier Code (Res. A.328) and Gas Carrier Code 
for Existing Ships  IMO International 
Maritime Dangerous Goods Code and 
U.N. Transport of 
Dangerous Goods  IMO Code of Safe 
Practice for Solid Bulk Cargoes  Maritime Safety 
Committee Circular 298 (MSC Circ. 298)   
MARINE SAFETY 
MANUAL  VOL II Chapter  F1 Chapter  F1  Chapter F1  Chapter F1  Chapter F1  


 
E. REGULATIONS  
 
 
1. General  
 
The primary regulations governing the transportation of hazardous materials by vessels are:   
Citation  Subject  
 
46 CFR Part 146   
Vessels transporting military explosives  
46 CFR Part 147 Vessels carrying ships' stores which are hazardous 
materials  
 
46 CFR Part 148 Vessels carrying bulk solid hazardous materials  
 
46 CFR Part 150 Compatible stowage of bulk liquid hazardous materials 
and for vessels engaged in bulk hazardous waste incineration at sea 
 
46 CFR Part 151 Unmanned barges carrying hazardous  materials in bulk  
 
46 CFR Part 153 Self-propelled ships carrying hazardous materials in bulk  
 
46 CFR Part 154 Self-propelled ships carrying liquefied gases in bulk  
  
49 CFR Parts 171-179 Packaged goods  
 
 
2. Required Documentation 
 
Under 46 CFR Parts 153 and 154, the Coast Guard recognizes a Certificate of Fitness 
(COF) issued in accordance with the IMO Bulk Chemical Code, the International Bulk Chemical Code, the IMO Gas Code for New Ships, and the International Gas Carrier Code , together with the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) 
certificates, as equivalent to a Coast Guard issued Certificate of Inspection (COI), with some exceptions.  Issuance of these documents permits issuance of a Letter of Compliance (LOC) with 46 C FR Subchapter O E ndorsement to foreign vessels without 
the need for Coast Guard plan review.  Situations involving packaged cargo are addressed similarly. To the extent permitted by 49 CFR 176.11, a packaged cargo shipped on a vessel in accordance with t he recommendations of the IMO IMDG Code is 
acceptable.  
 
 
USCG Marine Safety Manual, Vol. II: Materiel Inspection  
 
SECTION F:  CARRIAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS  
 
CHAPTER 1:  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY 
 
 
NOTE: This does not mean that such vessels will meet all requirements of 46 CFR 
Parts 153- 154. 
 
############
 
F. INTERNATIONAL CODES  
 
 1. Introduction 
 
a. The codes relative to the carriage of hazardous materials are:  
 
(1) IMO Chemical Code . The Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships 
Carrying Dangerous Chemicals i n Bulk ( the IMO Chemical Code) , IMO 
Assembly Resolution A.212(VII), adopted 12 October 1971 and the IMO 
International Bulk Chemical Code, IMO Resolution MSC 4(48), adopted 17 June 1983, a pplies to all ships with a keel laying date before 1 July 1986. The 
International Bulk Chemical Code applies to all ships with a keel laying date on or after 1 July 1986. Both the IMO Bulk Chemical Code and International Bulk Chemical Code were revised and reissued to cover requirements stemming from Annex II of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution From Ships, 1973, as m odified by the Protocol of 1978 (MARPOL 
73/78). MARPOL Annex II entered into force on 6 April 1987. The revised IMO Bulk Chemical Code was adopted under Resolutions MEPC 20(22) and MSC 9(53). The revised International Bulk Chemical Code was adopted under Resoluti on MEPC 19(22). 
 
(2) IMO Gas Code . The Code For The Construction And Equipment Of Ships 
Carrying Liquefied Gases In Bulk ( the IMO Gas Code) , IMO Assembly 
Resolution A.328(IX), was adopted 12 November 1975. The IMO Gas Code applies to new ships ; defined in the Code ships with a keel laying date before 1 
July 1986. 
 
(3) IMO International Gas Carrier Code . The IMO International Gas Carrier Code, 
IMO Resolution MSC 5(48), was adopted 17 June 1983. The International Gas Carrier Code applies to all ships with a k eel laying date on or after 1 July 1986. 
 
(4) IMO Gas Code f or Existing Ships . The Code for Existing Ships Carrying 
Liquefied Gases i n Bulk (the  IMO Gas Code f or Existing Ships ), applies to 
those gas ships not covered by the Gas Code for New Ships.  
 
(5) IMDG Code . The IMDG Code  addresses transportation of packaged hazardous 
materials.  
 
                                                         F1 -  7                                                        CH -1    


 
(6) List o f Bulk Materials Possessing Chemical Hazards . Appendix B of the Code 
of Safe Practice for Solid Bulk Cargoes, the List of Bulk Materials Possessing 
Chemical Hazards, addresses transportation of bulk hazardous solids.  
 b. Some of these codes are international recommendations and are not binding under international law. However, several codes dealing with hazardous materials have been incorporated into internationa l law. These include the International Bulk 
Chemical Code and the International Gas Carrier Code, which are both made mandatory by reference in the 1983 amendments to SOLAS 74. With the implementation of Annex II of MARPOL 73/78 on 6 April 1987, the IMO Bulk Chemical Code and the International Bulk Chemical Code are mandatory under international law.  
 
 
2. Application of Codes  
 
There are sometimes  differences between the requirements of U.S. regulations and 
international codes.  For example, f oreign vessels built to the standards of the IMO 
Chemical Code do not necessarily meet Coast Guard standards. It has been the Commandant's policy to adopt international codes such as the IMO Chemical Code as minimum standards and to establish higher standa rds only where essential safety 
concerns are involved.  Because international codes are drafted by an international body, they may need to be vaguely worded to satisfy all member countries.   In contrast, U.S. Coast Guard regulations must be as precisely worded and detailed as possible.  For example, The Chemical Code requires that filling pipes extend to "near the bottom of the tank." Corresponding U.S. regulations require that filling pipes must extend to wi thin 4 inches or the fill pipe radius of the bottom of the tank.  The intent is to 
provide specific guidance to ship designers as to what is an acceptable interpretation of "near the bottom of the tank." In this case, for a foreign vessel whose filling pipe terminates "near the bottom of the tank," its IMO COF would be accepted, although its condition may not strictly meet Coast Guard standards. 
 
############
 
USCG Marine Safety Manual, Vol. II: Materiel Inspection  
 
SECTION F:  CARRIAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS  
 
CHAPTER 1:  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY 
 
 
 
Sources for Copies of Codes 
  
IMO Secretariat, Publications Section  New York Nautical Instrument  
4 Albert Embankment  and Service Co.  
London SE1 75R  140 West Broadway  
United Kingdom  New York, NY 10013 
TELEX 23588  
 
Baker, Lyman & Company  Labelmaster  
308 Magazine Street  5724 N. Pulaski Road  
New Orleans, LA 70130 Chicago, IL 60646 
 
UNZ & Company  Southwest Instrument Co.  
170 Broadway  235 West 7th Street  
New York, NY 10038 San Pedro, CA 90731 
 
 
 
G. IMO  CHEMICAL CODE 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
The IMO
 Chemical  Code, effective on 12 April 1972, is used for tankships carrying 
liquid chemicals in bulk.  The IMO Chemical Code required extensive upgrading of 
existing vessels over a 6 -yea
r period. (The IMO has defined an existing ship as one 
whose keel was laid before 12 April 1972.)  With the exception of damage stability and midship deckhouse arrangement s, an existing vessel was required to meet the same 
standards as a new vessel as of 12 April 1978. See  46 CFR Part 153 for the Coast Guard's 
implementing regulations.  Due to delays in publication, there is a contradiction between the IMO Code and the Coast Guard regulations. The Coast Guard regulations define an existing vessel as one for which was contracted for  on or before 27 December 1977. 
Therefore, a vessel contracted for on or after 12 April 1972 and not later than 27 December 1977 may obtain a COI as an existing vessel under 46 CFR Part 153. However,  the same vessel must be treated as a new vessel in order to receive an IMO 
COF.  
 
. Subdivision and Stability  
 
Da
mage stability standards and protective location of cargo tanks for existing tankships 
are addressed in subsection 1.7.3(a) -(f
) of the IMO Chemical Code and in 46 CFR 
153.7(c), as follows:  
 
                                                         F1 - 9                                                        CH -1    


 
a. An existing single -hulled vessel that must have double -bottoms and side tanks 
installed in order to continue carrying Type II cargoes should be evaluated to 
ensure that its damage stability is not impaired by such modifications.  
 b. An existing double -hulled vessel carrying Type II cargoes is exempt from damage 
stability evaluation and has less stringent requirements for bottom and side tank 
location clearances. Such a vessel must have a double -bottom height of at least 
760mm.  
 c. An existing Type III vessel that is being modified to carry Type II cargoes is requi red to meet the damage stability requirements of section 2.2.4 of the Code, 
but is not required to survive damage to the main machinery space. (A Type III vessel is a single- hulled vessel carrying cargoes requiring Type III containment.)  
 d. Existing Type I vessels are required to meet the damage stability requirements for new ships, but may be allowed minor relaxations of side and bottom tank separation distances. In effect, these standards exempt existing vessels from damage stability evaluations, unless cargo tank configurations are modified.  
 e. An existing Type III vessel is exempt from the Code's damage stability requirements.  
 
############
 
3. Design Specifications  
 
As previously noted, the Commandant has waived a plan review for chemical tankers that have valid COFs. However, this does not mean that foreign vessels have the option of obtaining a COF or undergoing plan review.  A foreign chemical tanker must have a valid COF to obtain an LOC unless its home administration does not issue IMO certificates.  Except for unusual cases, chemical tankers holding LOCs have been designed and equipped in accordance with the IMO Code. Therefore, they should comply with the Code's operating requirements as well as 46 CFR Part 153.  The IMO Code will be the 
primary reference for examination of foreign chemical tankers.  
 
4. Hull Type Designations  
 
The format and content of the IMO Chemical Code were based , to some extent , on the 
U.S. regulations for unmanned barges carrying bulk cargoes (46 CFR Part 151). The IMO Chemical Code’s designation of hull types, the table summarizing the minimum requirements, and the referencing of special requirements for individual cargoes will  be 
familiar to users of the unmanned barge regulations.  Like 46 CFR Part 151, the IMO Chemical Code identifies three hull types: Type I ( very hazardous cargoes), Type II 
(moderately  hazardous cargoes), and Type III (least hazardous cargoes).  T here i s no 
 
 
USCG Marine Safety Manual, Vol. II: Materiel Inspection  
 
SECTION F:  CARRIAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS  
 
CHAPTER 1:  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY 
 
 
direct correlation between ship and barge hull types ; a cargo that must be carried in a 
Type I barge won’t  necessarily be required to be carried in a Type I ship.  The hull type 
designation provides the following information about a vessel:  
 
a. Extent of hypothetical damage a vessel can sustain and remain afloat in a state of 
positive equilibrium . This is a standard used by naval architects to calculate a 
vessel's survivability. This is an important factor in plan review, but is of little concern to the inspector.  
 
b. Cargo tank location within the hull . A Type II cargo must be carried in a tank 
located at a distance greater than the vessel's beam divided by 15, but not more than 6 meters above the baseline. In no case may the tank be closer than 760 mm to the vessel's side or bottom shell.  
 
c. Maximum quantity of cargo that can be loaded in a tank . Type I cargoes are 
limited to 1 ,250 cubic meters per tank; Type II cargoes to 3,000 cubic meters per 
tank. Type III cargoes are no t restricted.  
 
NOTE:  These are loading restrictions, not restrictions on tank sizes.  
 
 
5. Table of Minimum Requirements  
 
Chapter 6 of the Code  contains a table that  summarizes minimum and special 
requirements for certain  products listed.  The  table uses several terms that require 
clarification:   
a. Tank vents . Tank venting is described as either controlled by a pressure -vacuum 
valve or safety relief valve or open through a gooseneck vent.  
 
b. Tank environmental control . This is not clear, as the word "yes" sometimes 
appears with no explanation of what is required. 46 CFR Part 153 should be consulted to determine appropriate requirements.  
 
############
c. Electrical instruments . Special requirements, identified by "SP," are not conta ined 
in the Code.  
 
d. Vapor detection . These are specified by "no detection," "flammable vapor 
detection," "toxic vapor detection," or the latter two. Detectors need not be permanently installed types, but may be reagent -tube-and-aspirator types.  
 
                                                         F1 -  11                                                        CH -1    


 
NOTE:  For some toxic substances, toxic vapor detection equipment is not currently 
available. The "universal interpretation" of Section 3.11 of the Code permits the 
substitution of additional air supplies, which are specified in P aragraph 3.16- 6(b) of 
the Code, when toxic vapor detection equipment is not commercially available. The 
COF should indicate when this substitution has been allowed. 
 
e. Fire protection requirements . The type of extinguishing medium that is most 
effective against fires involving particular cargoes (e.g., alcohol-resistant (polar 
solvent) foam, non- polar solvent foam, water spray, dry chemical, or nonspecific) 
is identified.  
 
(1) The Chemical Code provides standards for fixed deck foam systems aboard vessels contracted after 20 May 1980. These standards include foam monitor configuration, rates of foam production, and foam coverage.  
 (2) Administrations may accept other configur ations and foam production rates for 
vessels that carry a restricted number of cargoes. For vessels built prior to 20 May 1980, individual administrations must approve installations based on their own guidelines.  
 
f. Special requirements . The last column of the table references special requirements 
for individual products.  
 
 
6. Summary  
 
The IMO Chemical Code leaves many areas open to interpretation. The corresponding requirements in 46 CFR Part 153 are therefore more detailed than the IMO Chemical Code.  O ther A dministrations may have regulations regarding the same IMO Chemical 
Code requirements that differ from the U.S. regulations in terms of the details.   Because 
of the small differences that may occur, i t is necessary for an inspector to consider  both 
the IMO Chemical Code and the relevant regulations when inspecting a foreign chemical tanker.  The IMO Chemical Code should be cited as the primary reference, with the regulations providing U.S. interpretation of the Code's requirements.   U.S. regulations should not be used for a strict letter-for-letter inspection of a foreign 
vessel. 
 NVIC 13- 82 provides a convenient cross -reference between the IMO Chemical 
Code and 46 CFR Part 153.  
 
 
USCG Marine Safety Manual, Vol. II: Materiel Inspection  
 
SECTION F:  CARRIAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS  
 
CHAPTER 1:  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY 
 
 
H. IMO  GAS CODE FOR NEW SHIPS (IMO  GAS CODE) 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
After adoption of the Bulk Chemical Code, the IMO began development of a code for liquefied gas ships.  At the outset, it was agreed that th is new  code would apply only to 
new ships, to avoi d problems of upgrading existing ships.  Because of difficulties that 
became apparent with the vagueness of the Chemical Code, because the U nited States  
contributed more detailed requirements for gas ships, and because the requirements did not have to ac commodate existing vessels, the Gas Code is much more detailed than the 
Chemical Code. G reater specificity was a primary goal of the U nited S tates in developing 
the Gas Code; however, some degree of vagueness remains.  The requirements of 46 CFR Part 154 are intended to minimize the effects of this vagueness.  
 
############
 
2. Comparison with the Chemical Code  
 
The IMO Gas Code has certain similarities to  the Chemical Code and 46 CFR Part 153.  
The IMO Gas Code discusses four ship types rather than three; one of these is a special 
category of Type II ship, called a Type IIPG. Ships classed under the IMO Gas Code are referred to with a “G” at the end of the ship type to distinguish them from chemical tankers.   The  IMO Ga s Code’s  damage stability requirements are similar to those for 
chemical tankers, except that a greater final angle of heel after damage is allowed for gas ships.  Type IIPG ships have more relaxed damage stability standards than Type IIG ships. The tank location requirements for Type IG and Type IIG/IIPG vessels are the same as for Type I and II chemical tankers. Type IIIG gas ships are required to have tanks at least 760  mm inboard of the hull, while there is no separation requirement for 
Type III chemi cal tankers. Also, there is no cargo limitation requirement for Type IG and 
IIG/IIPG cargoes, as exists for chemical cargoes.  Generally, comparison of the IMO Gas and Chemical Codes reveals the Gas Code has  much more detailed requirements for tank 
and piping design, materials, venting, electrical equipment, fire protection, and instrumentation.  
 
 
3. Minimum Requirements  
 
a. Chapter XIX of the IMO Gas Code contains a Table of Minimum Requirements 
and references to special requirements for individual cargoes.  
                                                         F1 -  13                                                        CH -1    


 
b. The IMO Gas Code specifies the ship type for each cargo;  most requir e Type 
IIG/IIPG ships (in practice, there are no Type IIIG and few, if any, Type IG ships 
in use). Type IIPG ships, which are small vessels having pressure vessel tanks rated for at least 99.6 psig, may carry most cargoes that are permitted on a Type IIG ship. C argoes with very low transport temperatu res, such as methane and 
ethane , are exceptions .  
 
c. Pressurized cargoes . Cargoes that must be carried in pressure vessel tanks, or 
must have inerted or dried atmospheres above the cargo, are identified in Columns D and E of the Table of Minimum Requireme nts.  
 
d. Vapor detection . The vapor detection requirements are similar to those in the 
Chemical Code, except that flammable gas detectors and toxic vapor detectors for certain cargoes must be permanently installed, automatic monitors.  
 
e. Gauging . Gauging under the IMO Gas Code is the same as under the Chemical 
Code, except that there is no provision for an open gauge.  
 
f. Special requirements . The IMO Gas Code treats special requirements in a manner 
similar to the Chemical Code. The alkanes and alkenes (methane, propane, ethylene, etc.) have no special requirements because the Gas Code was drafted in anticipation of L iquefied N atural G as (LNG) and L iquefied P etroleum G as (LPG) 
ships. Thus, LNG and LPG  are the "normal" cargoes, with special requirements in 
the Gas Code to accommodate cargoes with  different properties.  
 
############
g. Chlorine . The IMO Gas Code (the first amendment, speci fically) contains detailed 
requirements for the  carriage of chlorine . As chlorine may not be carried on 
self-propelled vessels in U.S. waters, it is not included in 46 CFR 154.  
 
h. Anhydrous hydrogen fluoride . Anhydrous hydrogen fluoride may be added to t he 
IMO Gas Code in the future. As anhydrous hydrogen fluoride may not be carried on self -propelled vessels in U.S. waters, it is  not included in 46 CFR 154.  
 
 
4. Additional Requirements  
 
The detailed nature of the IMO Gas Code means that U .S. regulations correspond much 
more closely to it than to the Chemical Code.  However, four issues that the United States considers to be important safety concerns went  unresolved during the development of the 
IMO Gas Code.  To address these issues, 46 CFR Part 154 exceeds the Code in the following areas:   
a. Specification of higher allowable stress factors for Type B and C independent tanks . 
 
 
USCG Marine Safety Manual, Vol. II: Materiel Inspection  
 
SECTION F:  CARRIAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS  
 
CHAPTER 1:  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY 
 
 
b. Specification of lower design ambient temperatures for hull steel selection . 
 
c. Requirement of e nhanced grades of steel for crack -arresting purposes in the deck 
stringer, the sheer strake, and the bilge strake; and  
 d. Prohibition of cargo venting as a means of cargo temperature and pressure control.  
 
 
5. Control of Venting  
 
To carry any cargoes excep t methane, a vessel must have a refrigeration/re- liquefaction 
system or tanks designed to withstand the cargo's vapor pressure at 45°C.  Any methane boil-off must  be re -liquefied (to date, this has not proven economically feasible) or 
burned in the main propulsion system. Other means of disposal, such as incineration, are also permitted.  Venting may be allowed under certain controlled operations such as gas trials.  Emergencies may dictate control of cargo temperature and pressure by atmospheric vent ing.  
 
 
6. Application  
 
The IMO Gas Code applies only to new vessels.  
 
                                                         F1 -  15                                                        CH -1    


 
I. IMO Gas Code for Existing Ships  
 
 
1. Background  
 
Several IMO delegations were concerned that existing ships might be barred from some ports if they did not have some type of IMO certificate. Therefore, the IMO developed the Code for Existing Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk (the Gas Code for Existi ng 
Ships) for those vessels not covered by the IMO Gas Code.  The Gas Code for Existing Ships is similar to the IMO Gas Code, although some requirements are significantly relaxed. For example, requirements for cargo tank design, materials of construction, and piping design and construction are much less stringent under the Gas Code f or Existing 
Ships . The Gas Code for Existing Ships also requires no damage stability evaluation.  
 Basically, the  Gas Code for Existing Ships embraces previous standards for gas ship 
construction without requiring major upgrading. It does not distinguish cargo and hull types, and subject vessels may carry the products listed in Chapter 19 of the Code. These products correspond to the Type II and III cargoes listed in Chapter 19 of the Gas Code for New Ships.  Type I cargoes are intentionally excluded from the Gas Code for Existing Ships. Only ships designed and constructed to the IMO Gas Code may be considered for the carriage of such cargoes, including ethylene oxide, methyl bromide, and sulfur dioxide. 
 
############
 
2. Requirements 
 
The Gas Code for Existing Ships require d some upgrading of existing ships, particularly 
for instrumentation and fire protection. These upgrades were required to have been comp leted by 31 October 1982.  The note in the Gas Code for Existing Ships’ preamble 
that specifies that the Code "is not meant to replace any controls which may already be in operation" is applicable to the U.S. LOC Program. Because the Code generally sets a lower standard for gas ships than the U.S. LOC Program  does , the Coast Guard has  not 
fully adopt ed it.  Whe n the Gas Code for Existing Ships requires upgrading to a standard 
that exceeds current the U.S. regulations, the Coast Guard will adopt those pr ovisions in 
46 CFR Part 154.  
 
 
USCG Marine Safety Manual, Vol. II: Materiel Inspection  
 
SECTION F:  CARRIAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS  
 
CHAPTER 1:  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY 
 
 
J. SHIPS NOT STRICTLY COVERED BY THE IMO  GAS CODES  
 
 
The Gas Code for Existing Ships was primarily aimed at ships already in service. Although the provisions of the IMO Gas Code and the Gas Code for Existing Ships theoretically apply to all gas ships, there is a third category of vessels: those under construction when the IMO Gas Code was adopted, but to which it does not apply.  The IMO 's intent, as stated in Resolution A.329(IX), is that ships under construction 
should meet the IMO Gas Code as fully as possible, according to their stage of construction.  Such ships would, of course, have to meet the requirements of the Gas Code for Existing Ships as a minimum.  
 
 
K. IMDG  CODE 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
The IMO developed the IMDG Code to aid administrations in applying the requirements of Chapter VII of the 1960 and 1974 SOLAS Conventions.  The IMDG Code contains recommendations for classification, marking, labeling, packaging, placarding, stowage, and segregation of hazardous materials for maritime transportation.  The IMDG Code’s  
information is similar to that found in the DOT Hazardous Materials Regulations (49 CFR Subchapter C).  
 
 
2. Application  
 
When packaged hazardous materials are shipped intermodally to the port area (i.e., by truck or rail to the vessel), the shipper may consult  the Optional Hazardous Materials 
Table in 49 CFR 172.102.  This table incorporates many of the IMDG Code's provisions. This is important to the shipper because it facilitates acceptance of the packages at the port of destination.  Cargo must always be segregated and stowed in accordance with 49 CFR Subchapter C.  IMO stowage and segregation requirements have been incorporated to the greatest extent possible in 49 CFR Table 172.102, Column 7(c), "Other Requirements ."  As indicated in 49 CFR 176.11, parts of the IMDG Code may be used in 
lieu of 49 CFR Subchapter C for domestic and international maritime shipment of packaged hazardous materials, except Class A and B explosives and radioactive materials.  
 
 
 
                                                         F1 -  17                                                        CH -1    


 
3. Alternate Arrangements 
 
Problems may be encountered in trying to comply with the stowage requirements of 49 CFR Subchapter C.  Any such problems can be resolved by the Captain of the Port (COTP) through accept ance of alternate stowage procedures under 49 CFR 176.65.  
 
############
 
4. Forma t of the Code  
 
The IMDG Code is a five volume loose -leaf publication.  The IMDG Code’s introduction 
explains the Code’s  purpose and application; i dentifies nine classes of dangerous goods; 
and gives general requirements for testing, shipping documents, classification, marking, labeling, packaging, freight container transport, portable tanks, stowage, and segregation. In the remainder of the IMDG Code, each class of dangerous goods is listed sep arately. 
The introduction for each class gives specific requirements that are particular to that class.  Each commodity or group of commodities is listed on a separate page, with a limited description of the product and its properties, its chemical formu la where 
appropriate, the United Nations (UN) classification number, and synonyms.  Annex I of the IMDG Code, found in Volume I, contains recommendations with respect to hazardous materials packaging. IMDG Code Annex I uses a performance- test approach 
rather than detailed packaging specifications like those used by DOT.  IMO packaging falls into three groups, with Group I packaging subject to the most stringent performance 
tests and Group III the least. Practically speaking, all hazardous materials must be packaged as required by 49 CFR Subchapter C unless they are intended to remain wit hin 
the port area.  
 
 
5. Certificates of Competent Authority  
 
Often, the entry on the IMDG Code page for packaging is "Receptacles approved by the competent authority of the country concerned."  Other areas of the IMDG Code require specific approval by the competent authority. In these cases, the OHMT will issue the proper certificate.  T hese are not "exemptions" since they are in accordance with U.S. 
law.  Competent authority certificates iss ued by the OHMT are intended primarily for use 
in foreign ports. Such certificates issued by foreign governments are valid in the United States when the IMDG Code authorizes the use of a competent authority certificate, but only in the port area.  Shippe rs desiring competent authority certificates should contact 
the OHMT at ( 202) 366- 4511.  
 
 
USCG Marine Safety Manual, Vol. II: Materiel Inspection  
 
SECTION F:  CARRIAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS  
 
CHAPTER 1:  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY 
 
 
L. "Recommendations on the Safe Use of Pesticides in Ships"  
 
Recommendations on the Safe Use of Pesticides in Ships, IMO Maritime Safety Committee Circular 298, pro vides useful information on the safe use of pesticides and 
rodenticides aboard ships. It is of interest because of the possible health and safety hazards of fumigation to persons aboard.  Coast Guard regulations for fumigation are contained in 46 CFR Part 147A (Interim Regulations for Shipboard Fumigation).  
 
 
M. INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE PREVENTION OF POLLUTION FROM 
SHIPS, 1973,  AS MODIFIED BY THE PROTOCOL OF 1978,  RELATIVE THERETO (MARPOL  
73/78). 
 
 
1. Authority  
 
MARPOL 73/78 is binding under international law and is implemented domestically in 
33 U.S.C. 1901- 1911.  
 
 
2. MARPOL Annex II  
 
Annex II of the MARPOL 73/78 Convention applies to noxious liquid substances carried aboard tankers.  The criteria for designa ting noxious liquid substances are similar to the 
Environmental Protection Agency's criteria for identifying hazardous substances.  MARPOL  Annex II is mandatory; any country that ratif ies the basic Convention must 
also accept Annex II (the U nited S tates is one such country). MARPOL 73/78 entered 
into force on 2 October 1983 and Annex II bec ame effective on 6 April 1987.  
 MARPOL Annex II’s primary intent is to limit and control the discharge of hazardous substances into the sea during normal operations, s uch as tank cleanings, and accidental 
pollution resulting from groundings and collisions.  The IMO has developed equipment and operational standards for ensuring compliance with Annex II. These standards have been implemented in Titles 33 and 46 CFR. The  final r ule promulgating these standards 
was published in the Federal Register on 12 March 1987.  
 
############
 
                                                         F1 -  19                                                        CH -1    


 
3. Implementation of MARPOL Annex II  
 
MARPOL Annex II  requires reception facilities to be provided for certain tank cleaning 
wastes.  See NVICs 4 -87 and 5- 87; MSM Volume II, Material Inspection, COMDTINST 
M16000.7A (series), Chapter E1, COMDTINST  M16450.28, and Guidance & 
Procedures for Administering & Enforcing the Noxious Liquid Substnace  (NLS) Waste 
Reception Facility Program, COMDTINST M16450.29 for guidance on implementing the regulations involving MARPOL Annex II. 
 
 
4. MARPOL Annex III  
 
Annex III of  MARPOL 73/78 applies to harmful substances carried in packaged form.  
The U nited S tates has not yet ratified MARPOL Annex III .  


 
A. Introduction 
 
Combustible and flammable liquids are classed as hazardous materials.  Further classification of hazardous materials is divided into two main areas: bulk shipments and 
packaged cargo. The applicability of regulations to cargo is determined by the cargo’s classification.  This chapter provides guidance for the carriage of combustible and flammable cargoes in either pack aged or bulk shipments. The remaining chapters of 
MSM Volume II, Material Inspection, COMDTINST M16000.7A (series), Section F , 
provide guidance for other hazardous materials shipments.  
 
 
B. Integral, Portable, or Fixed Independent Tanks  
 
These tanks may carry flammable or combustible products in bulk aboard cargo, 
miscellaneous, or passenger vessels in limited quantities, as permitted by the regulations found in 46 CFR 30.01-5, 70.05-30, 90.05-1, and 90.05-35.  
 
 
C. Definitions and Interpretations  
 
The determination of whether a  cargo is a bulk or  packaged shipment is of primary 
importance in identifying the proper authority and guidance for tank approvals, 
authorized products, and vessel operating requirements.  Vessel inspection requirements are aff ected by the interpretations of principal purpose and limited quantities  (these terms 
and their significance are explained in the following sections).  The following criteria and definitions apply to t he regulations for the use of portable and independent tanks . 
 
 
1. Packaged or Bulk Cargo 
 
Portable tanks, regardless of capacity, are deemed package cargo if the tank contents are not transferred aboard the vessel. (Tank approvals limit capacity.)   The filling, discharge, 
or recirculation of cargo in a M arine P ortable T ank (MPT) or independent tank on board 
a vessel is regarded as carriage in bulk.  
 
 
2. Combustible or Flammable Determinations  
 
If the cargo is carried as packaged  cargo , use the definitions in 49 CFR 173.115. 
46 CFR 30.10-15 and 30.10-22 apply to bulk shipments.  


 
3. Cargo or Passenger Vessel Designation  
 
Vessel type definitions for the carriage of packaged cargo are contained in 49 CFR 171.8. Offshore S upply V essels (OSVs) are interpreted as cargo vessels for the purpose of 
packaged cargo regulations.  
 
 
4. Cargo 
 
Oil and other combustible or flammable liquids are considered cargo when transported to and offloaded at a destination.  Fuel oil that a vessel carries in  its own integral tanks , for 
its own use , is not subject to the requirements of 46 CFR 30.01-5.  Exceptions to this 
definition include OSVs and some fishing vessels.  
 
 
5. Deadweight Tonnage (DWT)  
 
Deadweight T onnage ( DWT ) is a measure of a vessel's carrying capacity. DWT  is the 
difference in displacement between the vessel's deepest load waterline and its lightweight conditions.  Deadweight capacity includes: crew and effects, passengers and luggage, provisions and stores, fresh water, fuel, ballast, and cargo.  The lightweight  condition is 
defined in 46 CFR 170.055.  The vessel's deepest load waterline is the deepest draft permitted by the applicable regulations for the vessel.  
 
############
 
6. Limited Quantity  
 
Flammable and combustible cargo carried in bulk in an amount not to exceed 20 percent of the vessel's DWT is considered to be limited quantity.   For Grade E drilling fluids 
(mud ), the 20 percent volume may be computed using a specific gravity of 1.0.  
 
 
7. Principal Purpose  
 
When it is deemed that the principal purpose of a  vessel is to carry combustible or 
flammable liquids in bulk, either in MPTs or independent tanks, the vessel must be certificated under Subchapter D.  A  vessel carrying less than 20 percent of its DWT 
generally is not deemed to be principally carrying bulk combustible or flammable cargo.  


 
D. Portable Tanks  
 
Portable  tanks are approved containers designed to be loaded into, loaded on to , or 
temporarily attached to a vehicle or vessel.  A portable  tank is designed with approved 
handling arrangements, such as skids, lifting lugs, or intermodal container castings. Portable tanks may be handled or lifted full or empty and are treated as packaged containers.  Transfer, fill, discharge, or recirculation of cargo to portable tanks other than MPTs while the tanks are on board a vessel is prohibited.  Portable tanks f or flammable 
and combustible liquids fall into four primary categories : Department of Transportation 
(DOT) s pecification tanks, s pecial t anks, DOT-E (exemption) tanks, and MPTs.  
 
 
1. DOT Specification Tanks  
 
DOT specification tanks are DOT-51, DOT-57, IM-101, and IM-102 tanks regulated under 49 CFR Part  178. 
 
 
2. Special Tanks  
 
Special tanks are approved by Commandant (MSC) under 49 CFR 176.340. Special tanks  
are issued a Coast Guard letter of authorization for combustible liquids shipped as packaged cargo.  One example of a special tank is a tank approved for combustible -oil 
based drilling mud, with an open- lid top that  can be shut gas -tight.  
 
 
3. DOT- E (Exemption) Tanks  
 
Also called non-specification portable tanks, DOT-E (e xemption) t anks may be used to 
transport regulated commodities when authorized by a Materials Transportation Bureau (MTB) exemption.  These tanks are for packaged shipments only.  See 49 CFR 107 for relevant e xemption procedures. Although exemptions are issued by the MTB, the Coast 
Guard is consulted if the shipment involves marine transportation.  
 
 
4. MPTs  
 
Constructed and inspected in accordance with 46 CFR Part 64, MPTs are designed to be 
lifted while full of cargo (up to 55,000 pounds) and may be considered packaged.  MPTs are also approved for bulk shipments and are designed for the transfer of cargo while on board the vessel.  Pumping and piping equipment associated with filling or discharging an MPT must meet the applicable requirements of Subchapter F .  Endorsement of the 
Certificate of Inspection (COI) is required for bulk shipments (See G.2 below).  


 
 
Approval of portable tanks constructed and inspected under 46 CFR 98.35 expired on 1 October 1984. No extensions or waivers are authorized. 
 
 
E. INDEPENDENT TANKS  
 
Independent tanks a re authorized on miscellaneous vessels and OSVs for the carriage of 
Grade B and lower petroleum products.  Independent tanks are approved by the Marine Safety Center (MSC) and the cognizant Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI) for Grades D and E.  Requests for the carriage of cargo classed higher than Grade D must be forwarded through the cognizant OCMI and District Com mander (m) to Commandant 
(CG-CVC) for approval. The only size limitation for vessels requesting to carry this kind 
of cargo is a 20 percent deadweight capacity limitation.  Independent tanks must  only be 
loaded or offloaded while empty, and are always considered bulk shipments. The following is a list of conditions for the approval of fixed independent tanks . 
 
############
 
1. Design  
 
The fixed i ndependent t ank’s  structure and design arrangements must be submitted to the 
MSC for approval. The tank may be desi gned as a gravity tank.  
 
 
2. Stability and Loading  
 
The vessel's owner or operator must submit stability and deck loading calculations to the MSC showing that the intact stability and structural arrangements of the vessel are adequate with the  fixed independent  tank on board.  The calculations must cover all 
intended tank loading conditions for the route specified on the vessel's COI.  The vessel's stability letter must be amended to indicate any limitations on the carriage of the fixed independent tank based on stability considerations.  
 
3. Venting  
 The fixed independent tank must be fitted with a flame screen and pressure vacuum relief valve, or other suitable pressure relief device.  
 
 
 
  
4. Inspection  


 
 
The fixed independent tank must be gas-freed for internal inspection and hydrostatically 
tested at least every 4 years.  
 
 
5. Securing Devices 
 
The fixed independent tank must have  adequate securing devices and be secured to the 
vessel both in accordance with conditions listed on the vessel's stability letter and to the satisfaction of the cognizant OCMI.  
 
 
6. Nameplate  
 
The fixed independent tank must have a durable nameplate perm anently affixed to the 
tank structure in an accessible location listing -- 
 
a. Manufacturer's name, date of manufacture, and serial number;  
 b. Design pressure and test pressure in psig;  
 c. Volumetric capacity in gallons;  
 d. Maximum net weight and maxi mum gross weight in tons; and  
 e. Hydrostatic test date.  


 
 
 
F. Authorized Products  
 
 1. Portable Tanks  
 
Products that  may be carried in portable tanks are specified in 49 CFR 173.119 and the 
IM tank table published by the MTB (for IM tanks only).  Portable tanks approved under 49 CFR 176.340 may only be used for combustible liquids (flashpoint (FP) between 100 and 200° F) that have  no other hazard.  
 
 
2. MPTs  
 
On cargo and passenger vessels, combustible liquids may be carried in MPTs.   The 
carriage of flammable liquids (FP below 100° F) is limited by 49 CFR 173.119(a)(29) to cargo vessels engaged in offshore oil well drilling activities.  
 
 
3. Independent Tanks  
 
Vessels authorized under 46 CFR 30.01-05 and 90.05-35, may  carry flammable and 
combustible liquids in bulk. Such vessels may also carry Grade B and lower in f ixed 
independent tanks.  
 
 
G. VESSEL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS WHEN CARRYING PORTABLE OR FIXED 
INDEPENDENT TANKS  
 
 
1. Tonnage Measurement  
 
Independent tanks are subject to inclusion in gross tonnage if they meet certain size 
criteria and cannot be considered as deck cargo (freight). Addition or removal of such tanks on a vessel which has already been assigned gross and net tonnages could require vessel re- measurement and assignment of new tonnages. Refer to Navigation and Vessel 
Inspection Circular (
NVIC ) 11- 93 for details. 
 
 
 
 
2. COI Endorsement  


 
  
Except for portable tanks on small passenger vessels under 100 GT ( Subchapter T 
vessels) , vessels are not required to hold a COI in order to carry  flammable or 
combustible liquids in packaged form.  Vessels are required to have e ndorsements for all 
bulk combustible and flammable liquid cargo shipments. Such a vessel’s COI should be 
endorsed f or all independent tanks and MPTs equipped with fill or discharge piping, as 
follows:   
a. For the carriage of fixed independent tanks, a vessel’s COI endorsement must  
include a list of specific cargoes permitted to be carried and a statement that the tank must  be lifted on or off the vessel only when completely empty.  
 b. For the carriage of bulk cargo in an MPT, a vessel’s COI endorsement must  
include a list of specific cargoes authorized and an authorization to transfer to and from the MPT.  
 c. For the carriage of combustible cargo in integral tanks, a sample COI endorsement is "inspected for the carriage of Grade E combustible liquid drilling fluids in the following tanks: (specify each tank and capacity in gallons)."  
 d. For Subchapter T vessels carrying  packaged hazardous materials in portable 
tanks , a sample COI endorsement is: "Approved for the carriage, on open deck, of 
portable tanks containing hazardous materials as authorized by 49 CFR 172.101. For flammable or combustible liquids, addit ional fire protection is to be provided 
in accordance with 49 CFR 176.315. Tanks may not be discharged or filled on 
board. Not more than 16 passengers may be carried when portable tanks are not certified gas free."  
 
############
 
3. Firefighting  
 
A vessel's firefighting capabilities must meet the requirements of 46 CFR 98.30-37 and 
98.30- 39 for bulk carriage and 49 CFR 176.315 for packaged shipments.  No 
endorsement COI is necessary  for the extra firefighting equipment.  


 
4. Fixed Firefighting  
 
46 CFR 95.05-10(g) requires a fixed firefighting system to be installed in all tanks carrying combustible cargo. This has been shown to be impractical for drilling mud and other cargoes which could clog a fixed system.  Further relaxation of this regulation ha s 
been granted to OSVs.  In view of the high FP of Grade E cargoes and the tank arrangements on OSVs, this requirement may be relaxed on OSVs carrying Grade E cargoes at ambient temperatures.  This requirement should not be relaxed for vessels carrying Grade D cargoes or for Grade E cargoes at elevated temperatures.  Fixed firefighting requirements do not apply to MPTs or fixed independent tanks.  
 
 
5. Tank Fill/ Discharge  
 
Cargo may not be transferred or recirculated from or to portable tanks, other than approved MPTs, while the tanks are on board a vessel. MPTs are specifically designed to be transported either empty or full.   Fixed independent tanks must be loaded and 
offloaded while on the vessel and can only be moved when completely empty.  Pumping 
and piping equipment associated with MPTs and fixed independent tanks must meet the applicable requirements of Subchapters F and J.  
 
 
6. Stability  
 
The carriage of portable or independent tanks must be in accordance with the vessel's stability letter or booklet, regardless of any endorsement required on the COI.  
 
 
7. Stowage  
 
Portable tanks are restricted by 49 CFR 176.76(g)(3) to "on deck" stowage when containing flammable liquids or combustible liquids with a FP less than 141° F that are insoluble in water.  Other combustible liquids in portable tanks may be stowed on deck or underdeck on passenger and cargo vessels.  
 
 
8. Tankerman  
 
A tankerman is not required when transferring to or from an OSV ’s fuel tank. A 
tankerman is required for transfer to, from or between MPTs, independent tanks, or integral cargo tanks.  
 
H. Vessel Type Requirements 


 
 
 
1. OSVs  
 
Special consideration was provided for OSVs in P.L. 96-378, now 46 U.S.C. 3710(a).  However, the considerations of principal purpose and limiting quantities still apply to OSVs. An OSV may not carry more than 20 percent of its deadweight in bulk liquid cargo.  Regardless of the subchapter under which they are certificated, OSVs are considered cargo vessels for the purposes of 49 CFR and may carry combustible or flammable liquids in approved portable tanks.  Bulk combustible or flammable cargo is authorized under 46 CFR 90.05-35. The COI must  be endorsed for cargo carried in bulk.  
 
 
2. Small Passenger (Subchapter T) Vessels/ Crew Boats 
 
For the purposes of 49 CFR Subchapter C, T-boats on domestic voyages are considered cargo vessels when carrying 16 or less passengers and passenger vessel s when carrying 
more than 16 passengers (see 49 CFR 171.8 for the definitions of cargo vessel and passenger vessel).  A vessel may carry hazardous materials in approved portable tanks only when operating as a cargo vessel and specifically authorized by COI endorsement. Transfer of cargo to or from a portable tank or other packaging on board the vessel (with or without passengers aboard) is not authorized.  
 
############
 
3. Subchapter I Barges 
 
Cargo barges certificated under Subchapter I may not carry combustible or flammable liquids in any quantity in bulk. They may carry MPTs if the tank is not equipped to transfer cargo.  
 
 
I. Special Products  
 
 1. Drilling Fluids  
 
The composition of drilling fluids such as mud may vary depending upon use and source.   
Drilling mud with a FP greater than 200° F is not regulated as a hazardous material under 49 U.S.C. 1801-1812 (49 CFR 100-177).  Because drilling fluids are consider ed a 
product and service unique to the offshore oil industry, the limited quantity is defined as 20 percent of the DWT at a specific gravity of 1.0, for OSVs carrying Grade E drilling fluids. ( For more information on this topic see  MSM Volume II, Material Inspection, 


 
COMDTINST M16000.7A (series), Chapter A 1) for requirements when carrying Grade 
D and above cargoes.)  
 
a. Mud characteristics . There are two general categories of mud: water based and oil 
based.  
 
1. Water -based mud that  does not conta in any oil is not subject to the 
requirements of combustible liquids. Industry may designate mud as water based even though it contains oil , however, the mud would then be subject to 
the requirements of this chapter . Oil in any amount will subject the mud to the 
requirements of this chapter.  
 2. Generally, mud containing oil is considered a Grade E combustible liquid. However, it may be classed even higher (such as for "spent" or recycled mud). It is the shipper's responsibility to know the characteristics  of the mud.  
 
b. Carriage . Oil based mud must be carried in integral, portable, independent, or 
other approved tanks under the same considerations as other bulk combustible cargo. Oil based mud must  not be carried in open hopper type tanks or in any 
other  non- approved independent tanks.  
 
c. Quantity . Because of the densities of mud, special considerations should be given 
for stability of the vessel and sizing of independent tanks. The 20 percent deadweight limit is computed using a specific gravity of 1.0. Special consideration may be given by Commandant ( CG-CVC) for existing vessels to 
carry greater amounts.  
 
 
2. Oil Field Wastes  
 
Wastes, solids, cuttings, etc., that contain oil in any quantity are considered hazardous materials under the FWPCA.  Material s that have been contaminated by oil, even if 
washed, processed, or otherwise diluted to a low combustibility hazard, are regulated as Grade E products if capable of leaving a sheen. Therefore, transportation in non-approved tanks or uninspected ba rges (such as open hopper) is not authorized.  
 
 
3. Lube Oil  
 
Lube oil and other Grade E products with an FP greater than 200° F are not regulated under 49 CFR when carried in packaged form.  
 
4. Methanol  


 
 
Methanol (Methyl Alcohol) is a Grade C flammable liquid that is used by the offshore oil industry. The carriage of methanol in either integral or fixed independent tanks on OSVs is authorized, provided the following conditions are met:   
a. Paragraph 11.H of this C hapter , Applicable Tank Vessel Requirements, applies.  
 b. Paragraph 11.1 of this C hapter , Vessel Operating Requirements, applies.  
 c. A B- V semi -portable fire extinguisher must be provided on the open deck and be 
capable of reaching the methanol cargo tanks, tank vents, and transfer connections.  
 d. A fixed extinguishing system  that meet s the requirements of 46 CFR 34.05- 5 
must be provided to protect methanol pump rooms.  
 e. Portable fire extinguishers must be pr ovided as denoted for cargo areas in 46 CFR 
Table 34.50- 10(a). If used, the foam extinguishing agent for semi -portable and 
portable fire extinguishers protecting methanol areas must be of the polar solvent (alcohol resistant) type.  
 f. Methanol tanks may not be located vertically below the vessel's accommodations, service spaces, or navigating stations.  

############

A. CRITERIA FOR REGULATION  
 
The liquid chemicals regulated as hazardous materials under 46 CFR Subchapter O (Certain Bulk Dangerous Cargoes) all have one or more of the following properties:   
a. Unusual flammability (e.g., wider flammable limits, lower auto- ignition 
temperature), compared to normal petroleum products . 
 b. Toxicity (chronic or acute) . 
 c. Corrosivity . 
 d. Self-reactivity (polymerization). 
 e. Instability or unusual reactivity . 
 f. Pyrophoricity (auto- ignition) . 
 g. The potential to cause m arine pollution (damage to marine resources, bio-
accumulation, tainting of seafood, reduction of amenities). 
 
 
B. PRODUCT EVALUATION  
 
 1. Initial Review  
 
Before a new liquid product may be shipped in bulk, the shipper or manufacturer must submit a complet ed Characteristics of Liquid Chemicals Proposed for Bulk Water 
Movement, Form CG -4355, or the International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
equivalent, Circular Letter No. 944, "Characteristics of Liquid Chemicals Proposed for Marine Transport in Bulk," to the Hazardous Materials Standards Division, Commandant (CG-ENG).  The Hazardous Materials Standards Division, Commandant (CG -ENG), will 
then evaluate t he data on this form  and other information in available literature about the 
product. Based on the properties of the product, Commandant ( CG-ENG)  will make  a 
decision to place it in one of the following four categories:   
a. Flammable or combustible liquid regulated under 46 CFR Subchapter D . 
 b. Hazardous or polluting materials regulated under 46 CFR Subchapter O . 
 c. Too dangerous to be shipped in bulk.  
 d. Unregulated.  


2. Authorization for Shipment  
 
Until a  product has been evaluated and authorized for shipment, it is prohibited fr om bulk 
carriage.  If the product is within the purview of Subchapter O, tentative minimum requirements for its safe carriage are developed.  Commandant ( CG-ENG) will advise  the 
shipper , all D istrict C ommanders ( p), and the Marine Safety Center , Commandant  (CG-
MSC) of these requirements by letter or telex. This facilitates movement of the product prior to adoption of the minimum requirements as a final rule. Eventually, the product will be  included in 46 CFR Table 151.05;  46 CFR 153, Table I ; or 46 CFR 154, Tabl e 4. 
If a product that is offered for shipment is not included within one of these categories and the shipper cannot produce written authorization for shipment, Commandant (CG -ENG) 
can be contacted by telephone (commercial  (202) 372- 1401).  
 
 
3. Regulatory Control  
 
If the product has no significant hazards  other than flammability or combustibility , it is 
regulated under 46 CFR Subchapter D.  If the product possesses one or more of the properties listed in A of this chapter , it is regulated under Subchapter O.  
 
NOTE: The definitions of flammable and combustible in Subchapter D differ from 
those in 49 CFR Subchapter C. 
 A list of products regulated by neither Subchapter D nor Subchapter O is given in Appendix I to 46 CFR Part 153.  Cargoes that have been reviewed but are presently not permitted in bulk in U.S. waters are--  
a. Acrolein;  
 
b. Chlorine (on self -propelled vessels);  
 
c. Ethylenimine;  
 
############
d. Hydrofluoric a cid;  
 
e. Hydrogen;  
 
f. Hydrogen c hloride;  
 
g. Hydrogen f luoride;  
 
h. Methylcyclopentadienyl m anganese t ricarbonyl;  
 
i. Nitric a cid (greater than 70 percent concentration);  
 
j. Nitrogen t etroxide;  
 
k. Oxygen;  
 
l. Phosphorus t richloride; and  
 
m. beta-Propiolactone.  


C. PRODUCT CLASSIFICATION  
 
 
1. General Requirements 
 
Generally, products should be shipped under one of the names in the four categories given in B.1 above, rather than under trade names .  The only exceptions  would be  a 
mixture consisting solely of products listed in Subchapter D or unregulated products. Some  characteristics that are of interest when  classifying a particular product and 
developing minimum requirements for its carriage in bulk are  as follows :  
 
a. Flashpoint . 
  b. Vapor pressure . 
 c. Flammable limits . 
 d. Auto -ignition temperature . 
 e. Temperature of carriage. 
  f. Boiling and freezing points . 
 g. Toxicity of liquid and vapor . 
 h. Reactivity with itself, air, water, or materials of construction . 
  
i. Corrosivity to human skin and materials of construction. 
  j. Marine pollution potential.  
 These and other chemical and physical properties are evaluated to determine requirements for safe carriage, such as for hull type, temperature and pressure of carriage, vent height, gauging and venting types, firefighting media, materials of construction restrictions, and electrical class and group.  The overriding principle used in developing these requirements is contai nment of the product, commensurate with its hazards.  
 
 
2. Sample Evaluations  
 
Caustic soda (sodium hydroxide) .  
 
Caustic soda is highly corrosive to human skin. It is also nonflammable and nontoxic, has 
virtually no vapor pressure, and is not corrosive to mild steel. Caustic soda has minimum requirements for carriage in a single -hull vessel, with open gauging and venting, no 


specified vent height, no special firefighting media, and no special electrical equipment 
requirements. A luminum is not allowed in construction due to its corrosion by caustic 
soda and the associated generation of hydrogen.   
Allyl chloride . 
 Allyl chloride is  highly flammable and toxic, becomes more corrosive when wet, and has 
a relatively high vapor pressure. Accordingly, the requirements for its carriage specify separation from the vessel's hull, closed gauging and controlled venting (pressure- vacuum valves) , a high vent, and special firefighting media and electrical 
equipment. The pressure -vacuum valve is required to be set at or above 21 kilopascal 
(kPa) gauge (3 psig) to minimize the venting of cargo due to tank breathing.  
 
 
3. Awareness 
 
Data on the properties of these products is important to merchant mariners and to marine inspectors.  For their own safety, marine inspectors must be aware of the properties of cargoes they handle while they are aboard a vessel. Also, particular cargo pr operties may 
influence the O fficer in C harge , Marine I nspection (OCMI) requirements for correction 
of deficiencies found during routine inspections.  
 
 
4. Sources of Information  
 
A marine  inspector can usually find all necessary information on product properties in 
the latest editions of the Chemical Data Guide for Bulk Shipment by Water, COMDTINST  M16616.6, and the Chemical Hazards Response Information System 
(CHRIS) Manuals, COMDTINST M16465.11 and M16465.12.  For more information on product properties or advice on certain requirements, Commandant ( CG-ENG) may be 
contacted at ( 202) 267- 0103.  
 
############
 
D. POLYMERIZATION  
 
 1. Introduction 
 
Certain chemical products, called monomers, are required to be inhibited to prevent 
polymerization during transportation.  A polymerization reaction is generally exothermic (characterized by the release of heat) and usually leads to the formation of a so lid. 
Depending on the rate of reaction, polymerization may occur violently, causing severe structural damage by over -pressurization, or very slowly, resulting only in blocked 
transfer lines. Unfortunately, it is not possible to know precisely which monomer s will 


behave violently in specific instances. Accordingly, the possibility of cargo 
polymerization must always be viewed as a serious matter.  
 
 
2. Use of Inhibitors 
 
Inhibitors are chemicals added to the monomer to help prevent its self -reaction.  The 
regulations identify which cargoes need inhibitors, although they do not specify types or amounts. They also require the shipper to furnish a cargo certificate identifying the inhibitor used, the amount, the duration of its effectiveness, any temperature limitations, and actions to be taken if the length of the voyage exceeds the duration of the inhibitor (see 46 CFR 153.912 and 154.1818).  
 
 
E. CHEMICAL TANKSHIPS  
 
 1. Introduction 
 
The modern chemical tankship is a small, sophisticated vessel, usually of 20- 30,000 
Deadweight T ons ( DWT ) and having up to 42 tanks.  
 These tanks are often constructed of, or coated  or lined  with , stainless steel. Such 
protective measures enable the carriage of cargoes that normally attack mild steel and ensure product purity.   Piping and pumping systems are more highly segregated on chemical tankships than on conventional tankships, and deep well or submerged pumps are used in lieu of the traditional pumproom. The tanks are generally smaller, since most chemical cargoes are shipped in relatively small parcels. T he terms "parcel tankers" and "drugstore ships" are 
sometimes used to refer to this class of ships.  
 
 
2. Chemical Tankship Operations  
 
The nature of the chemical trade is such that chemical tankship operations differ 
somewhat from those of conventional petroleum product tank vessels.  Because of the small size of most cargoes, the parcel tanker usually visits many ports, sometimes moving among several berths in each port on a voyage. Others, however, are dedicated to a particular cargo carried on a regular route. As a result, some parcel tankers are approved for only one or two products, although most may carry many products.  In general, chemical tankships carry chemicals that are flammable and similar to petroleum products in some respects. Chemical tankships often carry clean products.  Consequently, U.S. chemical tanks hips are certificated under 46 CFR Subchapter D and endorsed to 
carry products under 46 CFR Subchapter O. The requirements in 46 CFR Subchapter O 


supplement, rather than supersede, the require ments of 46 CFR Subchapter D, unless 
otherwise stated.  
 
 
3. Applicable Regulations  
 
The regulations for chemical tankships are contained in 46 CFR Part 153 (Safety Rules for Self -Propelled Vessels Carrying Hazardous Liquids).  In accordance with the IMO  
Bulk Chemical Code, the  provisions in 46 CFR Part 153 became fully effective for 
existing tankers on 12 April 1978.  Existing tankers must comply with all  provisions of 
the regulations except for the following:  
 
############
Subject  CFR Citation  
Damage stability  46 CFR 172.130 and 172.133 
Door location  46 CFR 153.202  
Tank location  46 CFR 153.230 and 153.231 
Accommodation space location  46 CFR 153.234  
 
 4. Miscellaneous Considerations 
 
The damage stability requirements for existing chemical tankers are described in  subpart 
F.4 of this chapter.  Tank location requirements are relaxed for existing tankers, except that the distance between a Type II containment system and the vessel's bottom may not be less than 760mm (30 inches).  These considerations are handled by the MSC and Commandant ( CG-ENG). However, marine  inspector s will be concerned with the relaxed 
provisions for accommodation spaces and door locations.  Currently, the regulations do not prescribe specific standards for accommodation spaces in midship deckhouses on existing parcel tankers.  It has been found impractical to demand compliance with the door location requirements of 46 CFR 153.202 aboard existing ships .  The Coast Guard 
and other IMO administrations have agreed to guideli nes for the treatment of midship 
houses and door locations on existing ships. These are provided in Subpart F.3 of this Chapter .  


F. SAFETY RULES FOR SELF-PROPELLED VESSELS CARRYING HAZARDOUS 
LIQUIDS (46 CFR  PART 153) 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
As with any regulations, several areas of  46 CFR Part 153 have been modified, 
interpreted, and clarified as problems in their application were encountered.  The following guidance was developed to ensure uniformity in the interpretation and application of 46 CFR Part 153.  Technical problems in the appli cation of  these 
regulations should be brought to the attention of Commandant ( CG-ENG) at ( 202) 
 
 
2. Applicability  
 
Inquiries have been made concerning the application of 46 CFR Part 153 to a parcel tanker carrying cargoes regulated under 46 CFR Part 153 only in a limited area of the cargo containment/tank section of the vessel.  Many people have erroneously supposed that 46 CFR Part 153 would not apply to areas of the cargo containm ent/tank section if 
subject cargoes were not carried in these areas. An extension of this logic would lead to the treatment of individual tanks and piping systems as separate zones, subject to either 46 CFR Part 153 or Subchapter D.  This approach, however, is not what the Commandant intended. It is true that some situations may warrant special considerations and also that cargoes regulated under 46 CFR Part 153 may be carried in only some of a vessel’s the cargo tanks . However, 46 CFR Part 153 standards for fire protection, ballast piping and 
equipment, electrical equipment, personnel safety, and operational requirements must  be 
applied to the entire cargo containment section of the vessel.  
 
 
3. Standards for Midship and After Deckhous es Aboard Existing Vessels (46 
CFR 153.7(c)(3) -(5)) 
 
46 CFR 153.7(c)(3), (4), and (5) make allowances for existing vessels that do not meet  46 
CFR 153.234 requirements ( such as vessels with  midship deckhouses).  S uch vessels 
often cannot comply with 46 C FR 153.200 and 153.202 (General Vessel Arrangements) 
requirements.  The IMO Chemical Code also  makes allowances for existing vessels with 
midship deckhouses. As a result, existing chemical tankers with  an accommodation space 
in a midship deckhouse within the boundaries of the cargo area may continue to operate with this arrangement.  When a toxic cargo (those for which 46 CFR 153.526 is given as a special requirement in Table I of 46 CFR Part 153) or flammable cargo is  carried in the 
cargo tanks below the midship house, the following standards must  be applied:  

############

a. Cargo tank and accommodation space boundaries . Accommodations are not 
allowed in the space bounded by the tops of the cargo tanks and the first deck of 
the midship deckhouse (referred to as the bridge space).  
 
b. No through deck penetrations . Cargo tank tops forming a boundary of the bridge 
space must  be free of any through deck penetrations such as cargo tank hatches, 
Butterworth openings, deep well pumps, ullage openings, and sounding tubes.  
 
c. Deck penetrations . Electrical cables, pipe runs, and other penetrations in the first 
deck of the midship deckhouse, immediately above the cargo tank tops, are allowed  if they are made gastight. Doors, hatches, and other access openings in 
this deck of the midship house are not permitted.  
 
d. Ventilation systems . When the bridge space is bounded by a bulkhead at either 
side at the fore or aft end, the ventilation system must meet the requirements of 46 CFR 153.312 and 110.15- 1(b)(16). The increased ventilation rate prescribed in 46 
CFR 153.316 does not apply to the bridge space, regardless of the cargo carried.  
 
e. Electrical installations . Electrical installations within the bridge space must  meet 
the requirements of 46 CFR Subchapter J.  
 
f. Non-welded fixed cargo piping joints . Except for approved connections to 
shut-off valves and expansion joints, runs of  fixed cargo piping with non- welded 
joints are not permitted in the bridge space.  
 
g. Equivalencies . For existing vessels that are unable to meet the requirements of 46 
CFR 153.200 and 153.202, the following measures are considered to provide an equivalent standard of safety and are acceptable in accordance with 46 CFR 153.10. These following measures apply to the carriage of any cargo listed in Table I of 46 CFR 153 in any tank on the vessel : 
 
(1) Portlights located on the forward bulkhead of the aft deckhouse accommodation and on the midship house bulkheads facing the cargo area, except for wheelhouse windows, must  be fixed (i.e., incapable of being 
opened) and gastight.  
 (2) Wheelhouse windows must  meet the requirements of 46 CFR 153.200.  
 (3) Doors in the forward bulkhead of the aft deckhouse accommodation with  
access to  cargo tank deck must  be permanently sealed.  
 
(a) Where existing arrangements preclude this, a suitable airlock arrangement at the door location must  be provided. This installation must include a gastight, 
self-closing metal outer door and a substantially gastight , self -closing , inner 
door. This inner door must  be at least a metal joiner door.  


 
(b) The airlock space between the doors must b e mechanically ventilated from a 
nonhazardous location and maintained at overpressure to the space outside the airlock.  
 
(c) An audible and visual alarm system must  be provided to give warning on 
both sides of the airlock if both doors are open simultaneously.  
 
(4) Portlights on the side of the after deckhouse must also be fixed and gastight if they are located -- 
 
(a) On the first deck (tier) above the cargo deck; and  
 (b) Within 10 feet of the forward bulkhead, or within that distance aft of the forward  bulkhead to the first side door, whichever is less.  
 
############
(5) Doors located more than 2.4 meters above the cargo tank deck and facing the cargo tank area must  be substantially gastight and self -closing. This provision 
applies to doors on the aft deckhouse acc ommodation, as well as the midship 
house (the Commandant has determined that solid metal or wooden joiner doors, except those having screens or louvers, will fulfill this requirement).  
 (6) Because accommodations are not allowed in the bridge space, doors  accessing 
the cargo tank deck from the bridge space are exempt from these requirements.  
 
h. Some existing chemical tankers have been constructed so that the after accommodation spaces partially extend over a cargo pumproom ( this forms the 
after end of the cargo tank area). If this pumproom services tanks that carry cargoes regulated under 46 CFR Part 153, the pumproom must meet the ventilation requirements of 46 CFR 153.312 and 153.316. The pumproom ventilation system must be in operation at the following times:  
 
(1) During all phases of cargo handling and transfer . 
 
(2) During tank cleaning and gas -freeing. 
 
(3) Whenever work involving equipment within the pumproom is undertaken.  


4. Damage Stability Requirements for Existing Vessels  
 
a. General . 46 CFR 153.7(c)(3) and (5) permit the endorsement of an existing 
vessel's cargo containment system as Type II or Type III if the vessel has a l oad 
line c ertificate and meets any additional requirements listed. Existing vessels are 
not required to meet the damage stability requirements of the IMO Chemical 
Code. Since 46 CFR Part 153 was developed from the Chemical Code, 46 CFR 153.7(c)( 3) and (5) provide a similar waiver for existing vessels. Accordingly, 
such vessels need not meet the damage stability standards of 46 CFR 172.130, 172.133, and 153.231(b).  
 
b. Endorsements for Type II containment . 46 CFR 153.7(c)(3) imposes tank shell 
separation requirements for the endorsement of Type II systems. A valid l oad l ine 
certificate does not guarantee that an existing vessel meets any particular damage 
stability standard, or that damage stability calculations were ever made. Consequently, the r equirement for the l oad l ine c ertificate under 46 CFR 
153.7(c)(3) and (5) should be considered in this context.  
 
c. Requirements for conversions . 46 CFR 153.7(c)(4) stipulates that existing vessels 
undergoing conversions  to upgrade to a Type II containment system  by addition 
of double bottoms or wing tanks must meet the damage standards of 46 CFR 153.135 and 153.150 in all areas of the vessel, except the machinery spaces. Damage stability calculations are required for modifications of this nature and other  structural modifications.  
 
 
5. IMO Certificates  
 
A vessel that meets the definition of an existing vessel under 46 CFR 153.7(a)(2) and whose keel was laid after 12 April 1972 is considered a new vessel under the IMO Chemical Code.  If the owner of suc h a vessel applies for an IMO Chemical Code 
Certificate of Fitness (COF), the vessel is required to meet the requirements of 46 CFR Part 153 and the recommendations of the IMO Chemical Code as applicable to new ships. ( See 46 CFR 153.12.)  
 
############
 
6. Hull Type Calculations and General Vessel Arrangements 
 
For existing vessels, see F.4 of this Chapter  regarding damage stability standards and F.3 
of this Chapter  concerning standards for midship and aft deckhouses. ( See 46 CFR 
153.19, 172.130- 150 and 46 CFR 153.200- 202.)  


7. Personnel Emergency and Safety Equipment  
 
a. 46 CFR 153.214(a). Under section 3.16.9 of the IMO Chemical Code, only one 
stretcher is required (see F.29 of this Chapter ).  
 b. 46 CFR 153.214(c). 46 CFR Part 153 contains no standards for evaluating first aid 
kits; any first aid equipment is  sufficient to meet this requirement.  
 
 
8. Access to Void Spaces  
 
Regulations regarding a ccess to void s paces and c argo t ank a ccess are located in 46 CFR 
153.217 and 46 CFR 153.254, respectively. A summary of the requirements follows.  
a. General . In several cases, different criteria apparently have been applied to 
distinguish an access opening and an access trunk to a cargo tank or void space.  
 
(1) Access openings to void spaces and cargo tanks with  24-inch high coamings 
are not considered to be access trunks under 46 CFR 153.254(d). Access trunks are larger to account for internal projections, such as side -mounted ladders, 
that decrease the effective cross- sectional area of the opening.  
 (2) Whether or not an access opening to a cargo tank or void space is considered an access trunk depends upon the placement of mounted ladders and the resultant cross- sectional area.  
 
b. Access requirements . Horizontal access openings (e.g., hatches and manholes) 
must be of sufficient size to allow a person wearing a breathing apparatus to ascend or descend any ladder without obstruction.  
 (1) Minor relaxations of these standards will be permitted for existing vessels if the existing horizontal access openings allow a person wearing a breathing apparatus to enter or leave a space freely.  
 (2) Enlarging an access opening to the dimensions required under 46 CFR 153.254 might impair the structural integrity of the tank  or space. The intent of this 
section will be met if such an access opening is enlarged as much as is possible without impairing the structural integrity of the space.  
 
 
9. Type II Containment Systems  
 
See Subpart F.4 of this Chapter  for more information concerning the damage stability 
requirements for existing vessels, or 46 CFR 153.231(b)  for the relevant regulations.  


 
10. Fore and Aft Location  
 
See Subpart F.3 of this Chapter for more information or  46 CFR 153.234 for the relevant 
regulations. 
 
 
11. Piping System Design (46 CFR 153.280)  
 
Specifications and acceptable materials for piping systems are given in 46 CFR 56.60. Under 46 CFR 56.10- 5(d), plastic pipe and F iber G lass-Reinforced P lastic (FRP) pipe, 
such as "Bonstrand," must  not be used in transfer systems for flammable or combustible 
cargoes.  The Commandant has recognized the need for  parcel tankers to load relatively 
small quantities of hazardous cargoes without using the usual manifold or pumproom arrangements. The Commandant considers direct loading with portable piping and hoses to be  a suitable alternative.  When loading larger quantities (i.e., when one cargo is 
loaded into more than two tanks), fixed piping is required.  Direct loading through a fixed drop line or deep well pump stack from a portable piping system must comply with the following requirements:   
a. All connections between hoses, pipe s, fixed drop lines, and deep well pumps must  
be made in accordance with 33 CFR 156.130. Any connection between hose or pipe sections that have a reduced portable containment below must have a tightened bolt in each hole of the flange to secure the connect ions.  
 b. After disconnection, pipes and hoses must  be drained and cleaned before removal 
from the containment area.  
 c. Not more than one "Y" piece may be used for each cargo loaded (i.e., not more than two tanks may be loaded with any one cargo using t his method). 
 
############
d. Hoses must  meet the requirements of 33 CFR 154.500 or 46 CFR 153.940, 
according to the cargo being transferred. A portable hose line must  not consist of 
more than four sections or exceed 100 feet in length.  
 e. Portable pipes must be cons tructed of materials in accordance with the 
requirements of 46 CFR Part 56.  
 f. When loading or discharging a cargo that is required by 46 CFR Part 153 to have closed or restricted gauging, the fixed drop line or deep well pump connection must have a stop valve. After transfer, the valve should be left in place, closed, and blanked.  


12. Cargo Filling Lines  
 
The cargo tank filling lines on existing vessels that terminate near the bottom of the tank will meet the intent of this provision, and do not warrant modification.  See 46 CFR 153.282 for the relevant regulation.  
 
 
13. Emergency Shutdown Stations  
 
46 CFR 153.296(a) requires two emergency shutdown stations.  Section 2.11.1 of the Chemical Code requires only that remote shutdown devices be installed for all cargo pumps and similar equipment (see F.29 below).  
 
 
14. Ventilation Standards and Rates   
 
For information about ventilation s tandards and r ates, refer to the CFR  (46 CFR 153.312 
and 153.316)  and s ee Subpart F.3 of this Chapter .  
 
 
15. Hoisting Arrangements  
 
The Chemical Code does not specify a minimum lifting capacity for the pumproom hoisting arrangement.  Specifications prescribed by home administrations are acceptable for foreign vessels possessing COFs.  For more information, s ee Subpart F.29 of this 
Chapter or  46 CFR 153.332 for the relevant regulations.  
 
 
16. Bilge Pumping  
 
For the U.S. regulations concerning bilge pumping s ystems, see 46 CFR 153.334(b)(2). 
The Chemical Code does not require a bilge alarm in cargo pumprooms . See Subpart 
F.29 of this chapter for more information . 
 
 
17. Venting System Outlets  
 
This provision does not refer to flame screens.  Additionally, the IMO Chemical Code does not contain specifications for mesh flame screens. Whenever foreign vessels carry flammable or combustible cargoes, flame screens must be installed in accordance with 46 CFR 30.10- 25, 32.55- 20, and 35.30- 10. (46 C FR 153.352)  


18. Venting System Flow Capacity  
 
Section 2.13.2 of the Chemical Code include s the standards of 46 CFR 153.358.  The 
pressure differential specified in the Code is 20 kPa gauge (2.9 psig) in lieu of 28 kPa gauge (4.06 psig).   The unit kPa equals 0.145 psi; see Appendix III to 46 CFR Part 153.  A COF is sufficient to document that a foreign vessel meets these requirements. (46 CFR 153.358.)  
 
 
19. Venting System Restriction  
 
Rupture discs may be used in series with pressure- vacuum valves. (46 CFR 153.360)  
 
 
20. Required Closed Gauges  
 
Many foreign and U.S. parcel tankers use float type closed gauging devices as portable gauging equipment. The Coast Guard accepts p ortable clos ed gauging in lieu of a 
permanent installation provided it is installed and operated according to the gauge manufacturer's instructions.  Some float type gauges require the installation of guide wires to ensure proper operation; others have been designed so that guide wires are not necessary. The manufacturer's installation and operating manual must  be maintained 
aboard vessels equipped with these gauges for reference should a question arise over the need for guide wires. Vessels must also have d ocumentat ion from the manufacturer 
confirming that gauges can be used without guide wires.  46 CFR 153.404(d) also contains specifications for cargo sampling systems (although it does not require such installations).  
 
############
 
21. Heat Transfer Systems  
 
Foreign vessels must  comply with the standards of their classification societies or home 
administrations .  See Subpart F.29 of this Chapter for more information or  46 CFR 
153.430 for the relevant regulations.  
 
 
22. Heat Transfer Fluid  
 
The heat transfer fluid requirement s of 46 CFR 153.436 are intended to ensure that the 
heating medium and the cargo are compatible. Foreign vessels must  comply with section 
2.15.2 of the Chemical Code, which is equivalent to 46 CFR 153.436. 


23. Cargo Pressure or Temperature Alarms 
 
All foreign and U.S. vessels must  meet either 46 CFR 153.438(a)(1) or (2) and 
153.438(b).  Section 2.15.5 of the Chemical Code refers only to a temperature measuring system.   
NOTE:  Section 153.438(b) exceeds section 2.15.5 of the Code, which does not 
require an alarm on the bridge. 
 The temperature and pressure sensing arrangements required by this section must be independent of other temperature or pressure sensing arrangements, in accordance with 46 CFR 153.438(c).  Un der 46 CFR Part 153, alarms are required only for cooling 
systems, while the IMO requires alarms if overcooling or overheating could result in a dangerous condition.  
 
 
24. Inert Gas Systems  
 
46 CFR 153.500, which relates to inert gas systems, is equivale nt to section 2.19.3 of the 
Chemical Code with regard to inert gas generation (see Subpart F.29 of this Chapter for more information ). 
 
 
25. Special Requirements for Unusually Toxic Cargoes  
 
46 CFR 153.525(c)  specifies the placement of cargo pumps and calves for the carriage of 
unusually toxic cargoes .  There are major differences between th e 46 CFR 153.525(c) 
requirement s and the IMO Chemical Code, which does not require pumps and valves for 
unusually toxic  cargoes to be operable from the weather deck. Sections 2.10.4 and 4.13.3 
of the Code address standards for pumps and valves, but do not impose a standard equivalent to 46 CFR 153.525(c) . See F.29 of this chapter for more information .  
 
46 CFR 153.525(d)  gives heat transfer system requirements for the carriage of unusually 
toxic cargoes . 46 CFR 153.525(d)  corresponds to section 2.15.6 of the Chemical Code. 
Its intent is to minimize the contamination of potable water, feedwater, other cargoes, and fuel by toxic cargoes.  The most common heating system on existing ships uses low -
pressure steam produced by the main propulsion boilers or by cargo- heating boilers 
located in the engineroom. Condensate drainage from the cargo tank heating coils is returned to t he feedwater system by an inspection tank. Section 2.15.6(c) of the Code 
provides for this type of heating system.  Although systems that meet  the requirements of 
46 CFR 153.525(d)(1) or (2), or sections 2.15.6(a) or (b) of the Code, are preferable, the steam heating system previously described is acceptable if  the heating coil drainage 
returns to an inspection tank located on deck, within the cargo containment area. The inspection tank must be fitted with a drain valve to facilitate sampling of returns f or 
cargoes that are clear and soluble in water, and therefore virtually impossible to detect 

############

visually. If a vessel owner elects to use this or a similar system, the y must demonstrate 
that the necessary safeguards have been incorporated in the design.  
 
 
26. Toxic Vapor Detectors 
 
Vapor detection equipment may be unavailable for some cargoes to which 46 CFR 153.526 applies.  If the required equipment is unavailable for a particular toxic cargo that is transferred through a pumproom, the requirements of 46 CFR 153.336(b) must  be 
applied.  A vessel carrying a toxic cargo that is not piped through pumprooms, but rather through in- tank pumps, need not have the additional vapor detection equipment required 
by 46 CFR 153.336(b) (see Subpart F.29 of this Chapter for more details ).  Questions 
concerning the commercial availability of toxic vapor detectors for specif ic cargoes 
should be directed to Commandant ( CG-ENG).  
 
 
27. Special Requirements for Alkylene  
 
Water spray requirements for propylene oxide are found in S ection 4.7.21 of the IMO 
Chemical Code.  Under 46 CFR 153.530(p), the water spray system must operate automatically , while section 4.7.21 of the Code does not require automatic operation of 
the water spray system.  All foreign and U.S. vessels that handle alkylene oxides must comply with 46 CFR 153.530(p) . See Subpart F.29 of this Chapter for more details .  
 
 
28. Special Requirements for Acids 
 
Litmus paper or similar indicators will satisfy the  acid -detection  requirements  of 46 CFR 
153.554(c) . 
 
 
29. Examination for Letter of Compliance (LOC)  
 
Foreign vessels must  be examined for compliance with the IMO Chemical Code.  
Foreign flag vessels holding IMO Chemical Code COFs must still satisfy  certain design 
and equipment requirements from 46 CFR Part 153. These requirements are as follows:  
 
a. A vessel transporting a cargo with vapor pressure that exceeds 100 kPa absolute at 37.8
oC must meet the requirements of 46 CFR 153.370, 153.371, and 153.438. 
(See 153.9(a)(2) and F.23 of this Chapter ). 
 b. A vessel transporting alkylene oxides must meet the requirements of  46 CFR 
153.530 (b), (d) and (p)(1) . (See 153.9(a)(1) and F3 of this Chapter .) 


The requirements of 46 CFR 153 Subpart C apply to all foreign flag vessels.  For areas in 
which the Code’s intent is unclear, 46 CFR Part 153 must  be used as guidance.   
Questions should be referred to Commandant ( CG-CVC) . (46 CFR 153.808.)  
 
 
30. Certificate Endorsements 
 
Under 46 CFR 153.900(a), before a U.S. vessel is permitted to carry a cargo listed in Table I of 46 CFR 153, the vessel must have either a Certificate of Inspection (COI), Form CG -841 or a COI Amendment specifically endorsed for each cargo.  The 
endorsement must  list each cargo by name and the cargo tank(s) in which carriage is 
permitted.  Hull type classification must also be shown on the form as "TANKSHIP/HULL TYPE (I, II, or III, as appropriate)." 
 
 
31. Cargo Information Cards  
 
46 CFR 153.907 requires the master of a vessel to have onboard certain information about cargo carried. Possible sources of cargo information include the shi pper or 
manufacturer of the chemical, the CHRIS Manuals, and the I.C.S. Tanker Safety Guide. The card may be p rinted  on both sides.  
 46 CFR 153.907 will be revised to reflect this. 
 
############
 
32. Protective Clothing Required  
 
The protective clothing requirement of 46 CFR 153.933 applies only to persons on the 
vessel forward of the after deckhouse, who are engaged in the jobs listed in 46 CFR 153.933.  Therefore, this requirement would apply to terminal employees and personnel aboard the vessel who are engaged in any of those tasks.  
 
 
33. Entry into Spaces  
 
46 CFR 153.934(b) requires the master to ensure that personnel wear protective equipment with a self -contained breathing apparatus, if they enter cargo tanks, 
pumprooms, or void spaces that are not freed of toxic vapors or that lack sufficient oxygen to support life.  Thi s requirement applies to all cargoes listed in Table I of 46 
CFR 153. 


34. Standards for Marking of Cargo Hose  
 
The requirements of 46 CFR 153.940 apply only to cargo hoses used to transfer cargoes 
listed in Table I of 46 CFR 153 to or from a parcel tanker, including terminal hoses that are involved in the transfer of Table I cargoes . See Subpart F.11 of this Chapter for more 
information .  
 
 
35. Connecting a Cargo Hose  
 
46 CFR 153.972 requires the person in charge of cargo transfer to use a hose that meets 46 CFR 153.940 requirements.  
 
 
36. Plugged Scuppers for Inorganic Acids (33 CFR 155.310)  
 
33 CFR 155.310 requires deck scuppers to be plugged as a condition for  approving or 
continui ng bulk liquid hazardous material cargo transfer operations.  
 
a. It had been suggested that this prohibition against open scuppers may be inappropriate for certain cargoes. For example, inorganic acids are considered very corrosive to ordinary ferrous met als and alloys. The spill or leak procedures 
cited in the Chemical Data Guide for Bulk Shipment by Water recommend that certain inorganic acids (e.g., phosphoric acid) be flushed with large amounts of water. It follows  that if an inorganic acid spill occur red on deck and could not be 
washed off due to plugged scuppers, then the vessel's deck plating might be harmed.  
 b. Following careful consideration of the matter, the Coast Guard  determined that 
the prohibition against open scuppers is  appropriate for in organic acid carriers.  
 
(1) Inorganic acids are considered N oxious L iquid S ubstances (NLS) under 
MARPOL, Annex II (Regulations for the Control of Pollution by Noxious Liquid Substances in Bulk). Annex II regulates the discharge of NLS according to their category of hazard classification.  
 (2) Under MARPOL Annex II, discharge  of even the least harmful NLS, Category 
D, is prohibited unless it has been diluted to a concentration of 1 part of the 
substance in 10 parts of water. Therefore, scrupulous attention to duty during the cargo transfer process by cognizant personnel, in combination with the cargo discharge containment equipment required by 33 CFR 155.310(b)(3), are the primary means for protection from incidental spillage.  
 
(3) Unplugged scuppers would potentially allow the release of spilled acid directly into a waterway before it could be adequately diluted.  


c. Although inorganic acids do pose a corrosion hazard to ferrous materials, the 
potential for corrosion damage can be minimized by quickly diluting the spill or neutralizing it with appropriate agents. In only the most catastrophic scenarios might an untreat ed spill remain on deck long enough to cause significant damage 
to a vessel's deck plating. T he possible environmental consequences resulting 
from an inadequately diluted inorganic acid spill entering a waterway through open scuppers greatly exceed the thr eat of structural damage to the vessel.  
 d. Accordingly, the requirement to plug deck scuppers applies regardless of the cargo type being carried. In addition, although discharge of a diluted inorganic acid may be acceptable within the parameters established in MARPOL Annex II , 
responsible personnel should bear in mind the obligation to comply with the hazardous material discharge reportable quantities criteria in 33 CFR Subpart B.  
 
############
 
G. CHEMICAL BARGES  
 
 1. General  
 
46 CFR Part 151, which regulates  barges carrying certain bulk dangerous cargoes, 
became effective on 1 June 1970. 46 CFR Part 151 require d the upgrading of existing 
barges not previously certificated under 46 CFR Parts 36, 38, 39, 40, and 98.  The operating requirements in 46 CFR Part 151 apply to all barges. The intent of the se 
regulations is the same as those  for ships; containment of products to a degree 
commensurate with their hazards.  Barges carrying chemical products that are flammable or combustible are certificated under 46 C FR Subchapter D (Tank Vessels). Vessels 
carrying only nonflammable products can be certificated under Subchapter D or Subchapter I (Cargo and Miscellaneous Vessels), at the owner's preference. If the owner does not indicate a choice, the barge must be cert ificated under Subchapter D. The 
barge’s COI will then be endorsed for the carriage of specific cargoes under 46 CFR Part 151.  
 
 
2. Barges  
 
The regulations for barges carrying certain bulk dangerous cargoes follow the same general format those  for ships (i.e., general requirements for all chemical barges and a 
table of minimum and special requirements for individual products).  Commandant ( CG-
ENG) establishes tentative minimum requirements for new cargoes. The shipper, all Distric t Commanders (m), and the MSC are notified of these by letter.  


3. Clarification  
 
Since 46 CFR Part 151 was published, some confusion has arisen  in terms of 
interpretation and application. To clarify these points, and to specifically address manned barges, a regulatory project has been initiated to revise 46 CFR Part 151.  In the interim, questions involving manned barges or other areas open to interpretation in 46 CFR Part 151 should be referred to Commandant ( CG-ENG) at 202- 267-0103.  Questions 
regarding minimum requirements for cargoes that are not listed in 46 CFR Table 151.05 should be referred to Commandant ( CG-ENG) at 202- 267-0214.  For a n index for 46 
CFR Part 151, see 
NVIC  5-71.  
 
 
H. COMPATIBILITY OF CARGOES (46 CFR  PART 150,  SUBPART A) 
 
 1. General  
 
Cargo compatibility information is contained in 46 CFR Part 150, Subpart A, Compatibility  of Cargoes. This subpart applies to all U.S. and foreign vessels subject to 
inspection. It gives a definitive  answer to the question of whether two chemical cargoes 
are compatible and, therefore, whether they may be carried in adjacent tanks.  Mixing of  
incompatible chemicals in a tank or pipe may cause a chemical reaction that generates significant heat or gas which can be very hazardous to personnel and property.  46 CFR 150.150 allows the Commandant to grant exceptions to the compatibility chart, according to experimental data submitted to support exception requests.  
 
 
2. Testing Procedures 
 
Appendix III describes the test procedure to be followed by a shipper or manufacturer developing cargo compatibility  data.  46 CFR 150.160 requires the operator of a vessel 
carrying a cargo that is excepted under 46 CFR 150.150 but not listed in Appendix I, Exceptions t o the Chart, to do the following:  
 
a. Verify that Comman dant ( CG-ENG) has authorized, by letter or message, the 
pairing of cargoes as an exception to the compatibility chart .  
 b. Maintain a copy of the authorization letter or message aboard the vessel.  

############

I. INSPECTION OF VESSELS CARRYING HAZARDOUS LIQUID CARGOES  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The amount  and variet y of unconventional, hazardous liquid cargo being transported in 
bulk by water is  steadily increasing. Although the transportation and inspection hazards 
of petroleum products are generally well understood, newer commodities often have unusual properties, e.g., wide flammability limits, low ignition temperatures, foam incompatibility, or increased toxicity and reactivity.  Marine safety personnel should be aware of special circumstances that may be involved in the shipment of hazardous materials in the marine environment.  
 
 
2. References Concerning Hazardous or Dangerous Cargoes 
 
All marine safety personnel who inspect vessels carrying hazardous/dangerous cargoes in bulk must  become familiar with the chemical and physical properties of these products 
and the requirements of 46 CFR Parts 150, 151, 153, 154, and 154a.  Chemical and physical property information can be obtained from the publications listed in subpart C.4 of thi s chapter .  
 
 
3. Venting Systems Inspection  
 
a. Solids shipped in molten form ( sulphur, phenol) . There are a number of products 
transported in tank vessels that may plug or coat flame screens and, in some 
instances, vent  lines and pressure relief valves in cargo transfer piping.  
 
(1) One such class of chemicals includes solids shipped in molten form, such as sulfur or phenol. Hot vapors from these molten materials rise and can condense and solidify in cooler vent pipes, vent lines, and flame screens.  
 (2) Plugged lines may eventually occur if such deposits are not cleaned when they build up. In severe cases, heating system trace lines may be necessary for cargo, relief, and vent lines.  
 
b. Monomer substances . Another cl ass of chemicals that can cause similar problems 
is the monomers, i.e., styrene, ethyl acrylate, methyl methacrylate, and vinyl 
acetate.  
 
(1) Although these substances are inhibited in the liquid phase to help prevent self-reaction, the vapors are uninhibi ted and may polymerize (i.e., form chains 
of macro -molecules from smaller, reactive molecules) on the walls of the vent 
lines and flame screens.  


 
(2) Buildup can occur after several years of service, in some cases much faster. Overfilling of a tank or slo shing of product in the tank during a voyage can 
also deposit liquid in the horizontal runs of a vent system; the liquid will solidify after depletion of the inhibitor. Specialized inspection scopes have been devised which will allow detection of polymer deposits in vent lines and should be employed. 
 
c. Caution during inspections . Because of the potential problems of coated flame 
screens and blocked vent lines, these systems should be examined at each scheduled inspection to determine if  chemical buildup i s occurring.  
 
(1) Cleaning will be necessary if substantial coating is detected. Buildup caused by polymerization may be very difficult to remove, requiring special solvents, scraping, or exposure to high temperatures.  
 (2) The owner or operator should be advised that an active maintenance program is needed to maintain safety equipment against polymer buildup.  
 (3) Safety of personnel must also be considered. Toxic product vapors that condense or are heavier than air may fal l to the deck and endanger personnel.  
 (4) In many cases, the first loading and discharge of toxic cargoes should be witnessed by Coast Guard personnel, to ensure that all recognizable factors of personnel safety have been considered in the design of the system.  
 
############
d. Toxic cargoes . 46 CFR 151.50- 5(e) require s toxic cargo vapors from gravity type 
tanks to be controlled by using a P ressure/ Vacuum (PV) valve.  
 
(1) The minimum pressure setting of the PV valve is 0.21 kg/cm2 gauge (3 psig) 
but must not exceed the design pressure of the cargo tank. The intent of this requirement is to reduce the probability of the cargo tank venting during operations other than transfers.  
 (2) The minimum setting of the PV valve and design pressure of the cargo tank should not be less than 0.21 kg/cm
2 gauge (3 psig).  
 (3) The installation of the proper PV valve should be verified for barges authorized to carry toxic cargoes in gravity type cargo tanks.  
 (4) The pressure and vacuum setting of this PV valve should be entered in the Marine Safety Information System (Vessel File Cargo System product set).  


4. Carriage of Alkylene Oxides  
 
a. General concerns . The dangers presented by alkylene oxides, such as et hylene 
oxide or propylene oxide, are threefold:  
 
(1) They present a severe explosion hazard;  
 
(2) They are carried under a nitrogen pad because they polymerize in the atmosphere. Any residual cargo can react in this manner and foul piping and fittings; a nd  
 (3) They are highly reactive, and may not be compatible with the alternate cargo. Saturated hydrocarbons (e.g., propane, butane, pentane, hexane ) present no 
compatibility problems. However, alkylene oxides can react violently, sometimes explosively, with acids, bases, alcohols, aldehydes, amines, and 
other compounds.  
 
b. Tank cleaning standards . For the reasons described  above, the importance of 
thorough cleaning of alkylene oxide tanks cannot be overemphasized.  
 
(1) Methods recommended for the satisfactory cleaning of such tanks are provided 
in NVIC  5-79, "Inerting and Tank Cleaning Procedures for Alkylene Oxide 
Containment Systems."  
 (2) Under 46 CFR 153.1011(a), tanks being taken out of propylene oxide service or being returned to such service from carriage of other cargoes must be cleaned to the satisfaction of the marine inspector. Prior to inspection, the inspector  should be familiar with the procedures planned for cleaning a 
particular tank.  
 
c. Alternate cleaning methods . Tank cleaning m ethods that differ from those 
outlined in NVIC  5-79 may be employed provided they are consistent with good 
cleaning practices, as outlined by a recognized authority, such as the National Fire  
Protection Association. In this regard, there should be no evidence of residue and a marine chemist certificate should be provided. When the cleaning is completed to the inspector's satisfacti on and the tank is inerted, alkylene oxide may be 
loaded. See MSM Volume II, Material Inspection, COMDTINST M16000.7A (series), Chapter A5 concerning the role of the marine chemist.  


A. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Like bulk liquid chemicals, bulk liquefied gases are evaluated for shipment according to their particular properties.  Liquefied gases have most of the same properties as liquid chemicals. The procedures outlined in MSM Volume II, Material Inspection, COMDTINST M16000.7A (series), Chapter F1 for evaluating new products and establishing minimum requirements are also used  to evaluate bulk liquefied gases for 
shipment .  Some gases, such as the alkanes (methane, ethane, propane, etc.), have 
flammability as their primary hazard. Others are nonflammable but highly toxic, such as chlorine and sulfur dioxide. Still others are corrosive, capable of polymerization, unstable, or incompatible with common materials of construction. Some combinations of liquefied gases are incompatible; others require inhibition, as do liquid chemicals.  Most gases carried in bulk are designated as "cargoes of particular hazard" in 33 CFR 126.10 because of their potential ability to cause damage over large areas.  
 
############
 
2. Liquefaction Techniques  
 
When gases are carried in bulk, they are normally liquefied by compression, 
refrigeration, or both. Thus, they are carried in "unnatural" states, possessing tremendous amounts of potential energy. To contain them during carriage, the ir pressures or 
temperatures must be maintained.  Under Coast Guard regulations, a cargo tank for gases must be able to withstand the vapor pressure of the cargo at 45°C or have reliquefaction equipment. The  only exceptions to this rule are tanks that carry L iquefied N atural G as 
(LNG) (methane) or nitrogen.   
NOTE: Nitrogen is not currently carried as a cargo, but is carried as an inert gas.  
 Methane cannot be liquefied by pressure alone at temperatures above -82.2°C. Reliquefaction of methane is not currently practical on ships because the process requires very large refrigeration plants. Consequently, the boil-off vapors from LNG tanks are burned in the ship's boilers in order to control temperature and pressure within the cargo tanks without venting to the atmosphere.  


3. Determination of the Gaseous State  
 
The breakpoint between liquids and gases for purposes of the regulations is somewha t 
arbitrary.  In the past, the breakpoint has been a Reid V apor P ressure (RVP) of 276 
kilopascal (kPa) absolute (40 psia). However, when the International Maritime Organization (IMO) developed the  IMO Gas Code, certain products with RVPs below 
276 kPa absolute were included.  The Coast Guard regulations for gas ships now apply to cargoes with an RVP of 172 kPa absolute (25 psia) or higher. This includes the products that the IMO has included in the IMO  Gas Code.  The IMO Code has also been amended 
to allow the carriage of seven high vapor pressure chemicals previously allowed only on chemical tankers: propylene oxide, isoprene, isopropylamine, diethyl ether, monoethylamine, vinylethyl ether, and vinylidene chloride. All of these have an RVP between 101 and 172 kPa absolute.  Although these products do not meet the definition of a liquefied gas, they have been considered for carriage on gas ships. Special requirements for their carriage are similar to those for chemical carriers. U.S. gas ship regulations will be revised in the future to include these products.  
 
 
4. Addressing the Carriage of LNG  
 
The Coast Guard has published a guide to LNG:  Liquefied Natural Gas and Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas - Views and Practices, Policy and Safety, Commandant Instruction (COMDTINST) M16616.4. Ports that handle LNG ships have also published contingency plans concerning LNG incidents.  
 
 
B. NEW GAS SHIPS 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
"New" gas ships are defined under the IMO Gas Code for New Ships and 46 CFR Part 154 as ships contracted after 31 October 1976, having a keel laid after 31 December 1976, or delivered after 30 June 1980. Any ship that meets the standards of t his code, 
regardless of its age,  may be issued a Certificate of Fitness (COF).  
 
 
2. Containment of Cargo 
 
The major difference between a gas ship and an ordinary tanker is the cargo containment 
system. Due to a wealth of available information about contai nment systems in use 
(mostly about LNG tanks), this is not discussed in detail here. An overview of the types of tanks used on gas carriers follows :  

############

a. Integral gravity tanks . These are similar to conventional tanks on ordinary 
tankers. They cannot be use d for cargoes carried below -10°C without special 
approval, and are generally not approved for pressures above 24.5 kPa gauge 
(3.55 psig). As a result, they are rarely encountered on gas ships.  
 
b. Membrane tanks . As the name implies, these are very thin- walled tanks. They are 
not self-supporting and they must have a full secondary barrier, essentially another tank, surrounding the primary barrier. The primary and secondary barriers and the insulation are all supported by the inner hull of the vessel. Thes e tanks are 
capable of withstanding very low pressures only, internally and externally. They are used primarily for carriage of LNG.  
 
c. Semi-membrane tanks . These are similar to membrane tanks. However, they are 
self-supporting when empty, and thus may be built apart from the ship's hull and subsequently lowered into it. They have not been widely used.  
 
d. Independent tanks . There are three types of independent self-supporting tanks, or 
tanks that can be built outside the ship's hull. They do not form part of the ship's hull and are not essential to hull strength.  
 
(1) Type A . These are prism -shaped tanks having internal or external stiffeners. 
They are required to have secondary barriers, and are very common on gas ships.  
 
(2) Type B . These tanks are very much like pressure vessels, except that the 
weight, rather than the vapor pressure, of the cargo is the predominant desi gn 
parameter. T hey do not fully meet the design criteria for pressure vessels. 
However, their rounded forms are easier to analyze than Type A tanks. As a result, they are only required to have a partial secondary barrier, which is essentially an extremely large drip pan. The primary example of this type is the large spherical tank aboard an LNG ship. These tanks are designed to withstand about 207 kPa gauge (30 psig), although in practice the safety relief valves are set to relieve at pressures below 69 kPa gauge (10 psig).  
 
(3) Type C . True pressure vessels, these are very common in gas ships other than 
LNG carriers. They may or may not be refrigerated and insulated, and no secondary barrier is required.  


3. Regulatory Safety Factors  
 
All tank types exc ept Type C independent tanks are heavily instrumented, with gas 
detection equipment in the hold and interbarrier spaces, temperature sensors, and pressure gauges.  Hold spaces for tanks other than Types B and C must be inerted if the cargo is flammable.  H old spaces for Type B tanks or refrigerated Type C tanks may be 
filled with dry air with a dew point of -45°C or lower; ships with Type B tanks must be capable of inerting the largest hold space rapidly if a leak is detected.  46 CFR Part 154 requires higher safety standards than the IMO Gas Code, as outlined in the following subparagraphs:   
a. Design of type B and C tanks . U.S. regulations dictate that type B and C tanks 
must be designed with an allowable stress factor of A = 4.0. The IMO  Gas Code 
makes provisions for indicating compliance with the U.S. standard by listing the allowable stress factors on the COF. U.S. and foreign vessels must meet this standard. 
 
############
NOTE:  The IMO Gas Code permits the use of an A = 3.0 factor for some material s.  
 
b. Design ambient temperatures . Except for vessels with independent Type C tanks, 
the U.S. regulations require lower ambient design temperatures than the IMO Gas Code  does . The vessel’s COF must show the design temperatures. A foreign ship 
will not be  issued a Letter of Compliance (LOC) if it has not met the U.S. 
standard.  
 
c. Cargo tank pressure/ temperature control . U.S.  regulations do not permit the same 
options as the IMO Gas Code for controlling cargo temperature and pressure by periodic venting or operational restrictions on voyage length or locale. Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5) verifies that Coast Guard requirements are met, based 
on special classification society certification.  
 
d. Enhanced steel grades . Under 46 CFR Part 154, vessels are required to use 
enhanced grades of steel at the sheer strake, deck stringer, and bilge strake for crack arresting purposes.  
 
(1) The rules of some classification societies permit the construction of large LNG carriers with the entire outer she ll made of Grade A steel. No strakes of 
material with  enhanced notch toughness properties, to act as crack arresters, 
would be required. 
 
(2) Because of possible crack initiation from a spill of cryogenic liquid, the Coast Guard requires enhanced grades of  steel with enhanced crack arresting 
properties in the sheer strake, the deck stringer, and the bilge strake. This requirement must also be met for LOC gas ships (there is no indication of this 


on the COF). Commandant (G-MTH-1) verifies that crack arrestin g steels have 
been used before accepting an LOC application, by requiring appropriate 
classification society certification.  
 
 
4. Relationship Between Regulations and the IMO Gas Code 
 
a. General . Other than the  operating requirements and the higher standa rds 
described above, the U.S. regulations follow the IMO Gas Code as closely as 
possible. In fact, the regulatory sections were numbered to correspond to the chapters of the IMO Gas Code (e.g., 46 CFR  154.900 correspond to Chapter IX of 
the Code).  
 
(1) Because of the similarity, a valid IMO COF issued under the Gas Code for 
New Ships is generally accepted by the Coast Guard as evidence of compliance with all of 46 CFR Part 154, other than the special standards listed in  B.3 of 
this C hapter .  
 (2) The regulations contain certain operating requirements in addition to those in the IMO Gas Code, namely Subpart E of 46 CFR Part 154. These are applicable to foreign vessels, except as indicated.  
 
b. Certification of Compliance . Since a U.S. gas ship that  complies with  46 CFR 
Part 154 will also meet the requirements of the IMO Gas Code, the O fficer in 
Charge, M arine I nspection may issue the vessel a COF . The information needed 
to complete the COF must  be supplied by the Marine Safety Center. 
 
(1) It is not mandatory for a U.S. ship to have a COF, but the owner will probably request one.  
 (2) Liquefied gas ships are certificated under 46 CFR Subchapter D (Tank Vessels), and endorsed to carry specific cargoes under 46 CFR Part 154 (Subchapter O).  
 (3) New g as ships may also be certificated to carry liquid chemicals under 46 CFR 
Part 153. They must, however, meet all requirements of 46 CFR Part 153 for such certification.  

############

C. EXISTING GAS SHIPS 
 
 
1. Criteria for Designation  
 
Every gas ship that does not meet the new ship definition in 46 CFR Part 154 is an existing gas ship.  The Coast Guard recognizes that many of the gas ships that will be active for the next several decades were under construction or already contracted for at the inception of the Gas Code for New Ships. Although the IMO Gas Code does not strictly apply to these vessels, IMO urges all governments to apply the New Ship standards as far as reasonable and practicable, considering their stage of construction at the time of the IMO Gas Code's inception. This was accomplished  by IMO Resolution 
A.329(IX).  These vessels are issued an IMO A.329(IX) Certificate, which indicates that they meet the Gas Code for New Ships, except for the items listed in an enclosure to th e 
A.329 COF. For convenience and common reference, these vessels are known as  “A.329 
ships.”   A second category of existing gas ships includes those that were in service at the 
time the IMO Gas Code was written. Major changes to these vessels were not requ ired or 
expected , due to the excellent safety record of gas ships.  However, some upgrading of 
existing ships, particularly in firefighting equipment, has been required. IMO developed another code, the Gas Code for Existing Ships , to specifically address t hese ships. The 
required upgrades were included in this c ode, and compliance was required on a 2 or 6 
year schedule, depending upon the extent of modification necessary for each specific upgrade.  Since the Gas Code for Existing Ships  was adopted in 1975, all upgrades, 
including those with a 6- year lead time, are now in force.  
 
 
2. Upgrading Standards  
 
The first few LNG ships built for U.S. registry are in the A.329 category and are treated in accordance with Resolution A.329(IX). These vessels’  COF s carry  a few endorsements 
listing areas not in compliance with the Gas Code for New Ship s, Resolution A.328(IX). 
IMO Resolution A.329(IX) requires that these ships comply in full with the Gas Code for Existing Ships .  The Coast Guard is not adopting the Gas Code for Existing Ships  in full, 
since some of its standards are lower than those required under U.S. regulations and the LOC Program.  However, a future revision to 46 CFR Part 154 may require existing gas ships to meet all of the upgrading requirements specified by the Code. Once  the 
regulations  are amended  they will detail the procedures and certification necessary for 
issuance and renewal of the LOC for existing vessels.  The Coast Guard envisions  that 
LOC vessels will be required to possess a COF p rior to reissuance of an expired LOC. At 
the present time, 46 CFR Part 38 should be used as guidance for examinations of existing gas ships holding LOCs. In cases where a COF issued under the Gas Code for Existing Ships was used in part by Commandant ( CG-ENG-5) for acceptance of a vessel, that 
code should also be used for guidance during an LOC examination.  

############

D. BARGES CARRYING LIQUEFIED GASES  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The regulations for barges carrying liquefied gases with the  primary hazard of  
flammability (e.g., the alkanes and alkenes) are found in 46 CFR Part 38.  Regulations  for 
barges carrying liquefied gases with different or additional hazards are found in 46 CFR Part 151. The latter group includes ammonia, chlorine, butadiene, and vinyl  chloride.  
 
 
2. Chlorine Barges 
 
In the United States, c hlorine may only be carried on barges .  Because of its extremely 
dangerous nature, barges carrying chlorine are handled somewhat differently than most gas barges.   Existing barges, acceptance of which was grandfathered under 46 CFR Part 
151, have had wing tanks installed. These are called Type 1-S barges.  Due to the unique operating procedures for chlorine transfer, the Commandant has allowed the quick-closing, remote-activated valves required by 46 CFR Part 151 to be kept ashore when not in use. This arrangement is possible because the chlorine industry, for the most part, uses standardized fittings so that fit-up is not a problem. The valves may be under the control of a tankerman located ashore, as  no one is normally on the barge during 
transfer. If personnel are on the barge during transfer operations (but not during fit-up of hoses, etc.), at least one remote shutdown valve must  be on the barge.  
 
 
3. LNG Barges  
 
To date, only one LNG barge has been built; it is presently not in LNG service.  LNG barge designs are unique since they can neither refrigerate the cargo nor contain the vapor pressure of the cargo at 45°C, as barges carrying other gases are required to do.  To ensure that LNG vapors are not vented under normal conditions, LNG barges must contain the boil-off for twice the voyage length or 45 days, whichever is greater.  
 
 
4. Liquefied Hydrogen and Oxygen Barges  
 
Currently, liquefied hydrogen and liquefied oxygen have been shipped by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration e xclusively on barges operated as public vessels. 
No commercial barges have been approved to carry these cargoes.  


 
 1. Introduction 
 
In the early 1960's, it was recognized that most bulk dangerous cargoes were being carried on foreign vessels. The 1960 International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) and the regulations in 46 CFR Subchapter D did not adequately address these ships. Accordingly, the  Commandant established the Letter of Compliance ( LOC)  
Program to ensure the safe operation of these vessels.  The original LOC Program  was 
limited to the integrity and operation of the cargo containment section of the vessel and related systems, such as firefighting equipment . It did  not address aspects of ship design 
and equipment. Lifeboats, engine rooms, accommodations, and pollution prevention requirements were handled separately. This separation of functions led to some confusion on the part of ship owners and operators and Coast Guard inspectors.  Under  this 
program, m asters were issued a LOC from the Commandant, a letter affirming their 
compliance with pollution prevention regulations (a "letter of compliance") from the Officer in C harge, M arine I nspection (OCMI), and a Tank Vessel Safety Letter. Not only 
were there different documents issued, but the vessels were often examined by several different Coast Guard boarding teams in the same port.  To eliminate such redundancies,  
the Commandant  adopted a  revised LOC Program on 16 February 1978.  Current aspects 
of this LOC Program are detailed in the discussion of the 46 CFR Subchapter O endorsement to the LOC in MSM Volume II, Material Inspection, COMDTINST M16000.7A (series), Chapter D6 .  Figure F5-1of this C hapter  lists the regulations 
pertaining to and documents required by foreign tank vessels entering U.S. waters.  
 
############
 
2. International Maritime Organization (IMO) Codes and Certificates  
 
a. Program rationale . The International Maritime Organization (IMO ) Codes 
described in  MSM Volume II, Material Inspection, COMDTINST M16000.7A 
(series), Chapter F1 have eliminated the need for  Coast Guard plan review for 
most foreign vessels. H owever, this does not mean that the LOC Program has  
been abandoned.  
 
(1) Because IMO Certificates of Fitness (COFs) may be issued erroneously, and 
because some special U.S. requirements exceed IMO standards, the LOC Program remains necessary. In addition, the LOC is a vehicle for maintaining control over these vessels and ensuring compliance with IMO safety standards.  
 
(2) IMO Codes are recommendations, and are viewed by some administrations as strictly voluntary. Wa ivers, dispensations, and exemptions are common. For 


the Coast Guard to maintain the standard of safety established by the initial 
LOC Program , some control is necessary.  
 (3) Because plan review is no longer conducted for most vessels, effective examinat ion of vessels for issuance of a LOC has become more important. 
Codes, regulations, plan reviews, and certificates, no matter how well drafted and executed, will not replace a thorough examination. This is the primary reason for issuance of LOCs by the OCMI, rather than the Commandant.  
 
b. Requirements for certification . Some foreign ship owners elect  to seek a LOC 
based on plan review, rather than based on possession of an IMO COF. To eliminate this practice, and to have other administrations assume great er 
responsibility for their ships, the possession of an IMO Certificate is becoming mandatory.  
 
(1) Under 46 CFR Part 153, a foreign chemical tanker must have a valid COF to obtain a LOC; the same requirement applies to new liquefied gas ships under 46 CF R Part 154.  
 (2) At present, existing gas ships are not required to possess a COF and may apply for a LOC under Coast Guard plan review. Similarly, LOCs previously issued to existing gas ships based on plan review remain acceptable on that basis.  
 (3) In practice, many gas ships now applying for LOCs submit IMO certification that documents areas of compliance and noncompliance with the Gas Codes for New and Existing Ships. In many cases, this eliminates the need for plan review. When the standards in the IMO Gas Code for Existing Ships are adopted into U.S. regulations, all existing gas ships will be required to possess a COF to obtain a LOC.  
 
NOTE:  Because some administrations do not issue IMO COFs, their ships will not 
be able to obtain them. Such ves sels must  be examined as though they were U.S. 
vessels.  


 
FIGURE F5-1: 
APPLICABLE REGULATIONS AND REQUIRED DOCUMENTS FOR  
FOREIGN -FLAG TANK VESSELS ENTERING U.S.  WATERS  
 
 Coast Guard 
Regulations  IMO Codes  
 Documents  
 
Chemical / 
Liquefied Gas 
Unmanned 
Barges  46 CFR Part 151;  
46 CFR Parts 30-
40; or  46 CFR Parts 90-109. 
 None.  Coast Guard -issued Letter 
of Compliance (USCG LOC).  
Chemical 
Tankships  SOLAS2; 
33 CFR Parts 155, 159, and 164; or  
46 CFR Part 153.
 Code for the 
Construction and Equipment of Ships  
Carrying Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk, Res. A.212(VII) (IMO Chemical 
Code).  USCG LOC;  
Certificate of Fitness3; 
Comms. Certificate4; 
Safety Equipment Certificate; Safety Construction Certificate; 
Load Line Certificate.  
Notes:  
 
############
1 See 46 CFR 154.1 for definitions. 
2 A foreign flag vessel whose flag administration is not signatory to SOLAS must meet the requirements of 46 CFR, Subchapter D. 
3 A foreign flag vessel whose flag administration issues an IMO Certificate of Fitness must have this. 
4 Radiotelep hony and Radiotelegraphy Certificates. 


 
FIGURE F5-1 (CONTD ): 
APPLICABLE REGULATIONS AND REQUIRED DOCUMENTS FOR  
FOREIGN -FLAG TANK VESSELS ENTERING U.S.  WATERS  
 
 Coast Guard 
Regulations  IMO Codes  
 Documents  
 
New Gas 
Carriers1 SOLAS2; 
33 CFR Parts 
155, 159, and 164; and 46 CFR Parts 154.
 Code for the 
Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk, Res. A.328(IX) (IMO Gas Code for New Ships). 
 USCG LOC;  
Certificate of Fitness3; 
Comms. Cert.4; 
Safety Equipment Certificate; Safety Construction Certificate; Load Line Certificate.
 
Existing Gas 
Carriers1 SOLAS2; 
33 CFR Parts 155, 159, and 164; and 46 CFR Part 38. IMO Code for 
Existing Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk, or Recommendations Concerning Ships not covered by the Gas Co de for New 
Ships, Res. 
A.329(IX).  LOC (Issued by USCG)  
Comms. Certificate4 
Safety Equipment Certificate  
Safety Construction Certificate  
Load Line Certificate  
 
Notes:   
 
1 See 46 CFR 154.1 for definitions. 
2 A foreign flag vessel whose flag administration is not signatory to SOLAS must meet the requirements of 46 CFR, Subchapter D. 
3 A foreign flag vessel whose flag administration issues an IMO Certificate of Fitness must have this.  
4 Radiotelephony and Radiotelegraphy Certificates.  


 
3. Sequence of Determinations  
 
To identify regulations concerning hazardous liquids and gases carried in bulk that are applicable to a given vessel and cargo, a "decision tree" is provided in Figure F5-2.  The user should start from the left side and gradually work to the right by answering the questions "yes" or "no" to identify the regulation(s) applicable to a particular vessel.  
 
 
B. CARRIAGE OF BULK HAZARDOUS SOLIDS  
 
 1. General Procedures 
 
The requirem ents for marine shipment of bulk hazardous solids are found in 46 CFR Part 
148 ( Carriage of Bulk  Solid Materials that Require Special Handling ).  Products that may 
be shipped in bulk are listed in 46 CFR 148.01-7. T he properties of a material that make 
it hazardous are briefly described in Table 46 CFR 148.01-7(a). These regulations are somewhat similar to the bulk liquid regulations in 46 CFR Part 153 in that they provide general requirements for all hazardous solid cargoes and special requirements for individual materials.  However, under 46 CFR 148.01-9, an unlisted cargo may not be transported without permission of Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5). This differs from the  rules 
for bulk liquids  in that it only applies if the shipper determines that the material meets the 
definition of a hazardous material in 49 CFR 171.8. If the material meets this definition and is not listed by name in Table 46 CFR 148.01-7, Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5) will 
review the properties of the material.  If the material can be safely transported in bulk, the Coast Guard will issue a special permit describing the necessary procedures and handling requirements. This special permit must be maintained aboard the vessel whenever the hazardous material is being moved. Special permits are given expiration dates, usually 2 years from the date of issuance.  
 
############
 
2. Communications with Headquarters  
 
There are relatively few materials listed in 46 CFR Part 148. M ost bulk solid cargoes 
either do not meet the definition of  a hazardous material in 49 CFR 171.8, or are shipped 
under special permit.  When in doubt about a particular cargo, contact Commandant ( CG-
ENG- 5) at  
(202) 372- 1401.  
 
C. CARRIAGE OF INTERMODAL PACKAGES AND PORTABLE TANKS  


1. Introduction 
 
49 CFR Subchapter C gives t he Office of Hazardous Materials Transportation (OHMT), 
Department of Transportation (DOT), the  authority for the regulation of packaged 
shipment of hazardous materials.  The 49 CFR Subchapter C  regulations for packaged 
hazardous materials pertain to any material that is loaded and offloaded in an intact container (drum, box, portable tank, barrel, tank truck, or railroad tank car).   The Coast Guard has the responsibility to enforce the se regulat ions on vessels, but  may 
not issue, amend, waive , or issue exemptions to the regulations  under 49 CFR 107. 
However, the Coast Guard does have the authority to issue certain approvals. Some of these approvals are issued by the Commandant (see 49 CFR 176.76( a) and 176.340), and 
others by the district commander (see 49 CFR 176.88). The C aptain of the P ort (COTP) 
can also approve alternative stowage procedures under 49 CFR 176.65. As these approvals are provided for in the regulations, they are not considered e xemptions.  
 
 
2. Exemption Procedures 
 
Exemption procedures  are contained in 49 CFR 107. Although only the OHMT can issue 
exemptions, the y consult the  Coast Guard if the shipment involves marine transportation. 
The regulations also provide for emergency ex emptions  in the case of severe economic 
loss or threat to life. In such a case, the shipper should contact Commandant ( CG-ENG-
5), which will forward the request to the OHMT. If a shipment is being made under the provisions of an OHMT exemption, the shipper  must indicate the exemption number on 
all shipping papers and attach a copy of the exemption to the shipping papers.  
 
 
3. Application of Regulations  
 
a. The regulations include specific labeling requirements, both IMO classification 
and labeling, with corresponding DOT classification for shipment by other modes of transportation (49 CFR 171.12(b)). A summary of these requirements follows:  
 
(1) General . Under 171.12(b) and (f), hazardous materials may be shipped if a ny 
portion of the transportation is by vessel between points in a state or between states, or if they are prepared in accordance with the Optional Hazardous Materials Table in 49 CFR 172.102. This does not apply to Class A and Class B explosives or radioac tive materials . The Optional Table is derived from the 
International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) Code. T his option facilitate s 
the shipment of hazardous materials in international trade. Accordingly, hazardous material may be transport ed by any mode under the proper shipping 


name, classification, and label specified by the Optional Table in 49 CFR 
172.102, provided that the following are true :  
 
(a) The shipper includes the name of the DOT class that most closely corresponds  to the material's IMO class in the description of the hazardous 
material (on the shipping documentation).  
 (b) The hazardous material is otherwise shipped i n accordance with the DOT 
regulations.  
 (c) Column 1 of the hazardous material’s entry in the Optional Hazardous Material Table does not contain the letter "N." The letter "N" means that the entry is not an acceptable alternative and the material must be transported under the appropriate entry in 49 CFR 172.101.  
 
############
(2) Exemption from Coast Guard control . Materials that are listed in the IMDG 
Code but not regulated by DOT are not subject to Subchapter C . Such 
materials are therefore exempt from Coast Guard enforcement action. To eliminate confusion in transporting such materials, shippers should include a notation on the shipping papers that the material is only regulated under the IMDG Code.  
 
(3) Example . Triisobutyl aluminum would be shipped domestically as "Pyrophoric 
liquid, n.o.s. (triisobutyl aluminum), flammable liquid, UN 2845." For import or export, under the provisions of 49 CFR 171.12(b), 172.102, 172.201(a)(4)(i), and 172.203(i)(2), it may be shipped as "Triisobutyl aluminum, flammable liquid, 4.2, UN 1930, spontaneously combustible." The package must have the "SPONTANEOUSLY COMBUSTIBLE" la bel. The 
"FLAMMABLE LIQUID" label may also be affixed, as provided by 49 CFR 172.401(a).  
 
NOTE: IMO placarding is accomplished with an enlarged "SPONTANEOUSLY 
COMBUSTIBLE" label. For domestic transportation, the IMO placard and a 
"FLAMMABLE" placard are acceptable. 
 
b. Transportation by water outside the U nited S tates. For the relevant regulations, 
see 49 CFR 172.203(i)(2))  and 49 CFR 172.302(b).  
 
(1) When a mixture contains more than one hazardous material, the technical name required in parentheses is the name of the constituent that is of the same hazard class as the total mixture.  


(2) If a mixture is labeled with any subsidiary labels, the technical name of the 
material that compels the use of the subsidiary label must also be shown.  
 
(3) When a mi xture contains more than one material of the same hazard class, 
which results in that class or label being applied, only the technical name of the material that is the predominant reason for the class of label must be shown.  
 (4) When a mixture contains more than one material of the same hazard class in approximately the same percentages, only the name of the material with the highest level of hazard in the class (e.g., lowest flashpoint, most toxicity, etc.) need be shown.  
 c. Shipper's c ertification: See 49 CFR 172.204.  
 
(1) Carriage to the marine terminal . The highway common carrier, whether or not 
it is the initial carrier, must tender shipping papers to the marine terminal.  
 
(a) 49 CFR 171.2 provides that "no person may of fer or accept a hazardous 
material for transportation...unless that material is properly classed, described, packaged, marked, labeled, and in the condition for shipment as required by [49 CFR Subchapter C] ."  
 (b) In addition, 49 CFR 177.817(a) states tha t "a carrier may not transport a 
hazardous material unless it is accompanied by a shipping paper that is prepared in accordance with [49 CFR]  172.201, 172.202, and 172.203..."  
 (c) Intermediate or interline motor carriers must accurately transfer all of the information required by 49 CFR 172.201, 172.202, and 172.203 (see 49 CFR 177.817)  from the original shipping papers.  
 
(2) Marine shipment . The marine carrier may not transport hazardous materials 
without a certificate prepared in accordance with 49 CFR  172.204.  
 
(a) As the shipping papers presented by the interline motor carrier are not required to include this certificate, the marine carrier must obtain the shipper's certification from the shipper or the shipper's authorized representative.  
 (b) Shipper s often  satisf y this requirement by preparing a dock receipt, which 
the shipper certifies and forwards to the carrier before  shipment. In other 
cases, arrangements are made with motor carriers to provide a copy of a certified shipping paper when the shipment is delivered to the pier.  

############

(c) Regardless of method, t his certification is the shipper ’s responsibility. A 
preprinted si gnature on the shipping document is not acceptable because it is 
made before the applicable conditions and acts have come into existence.  
 
d. Reuse of packaging (49 CFR 173.28) . Much  hazardous materials packaging is 
durable and can be  reused, either for s hipping or other uses . 49 CFR 173.28 
places restrictions and requirements on the reuse of such packaging.  
 
(1) 49 CFR 173.28 require s that  all old hazardous materials markings and labels 
are removed or obliterated before the packaging is used for other ma terials.  
 
(2) Except under certain specified conditions , 49 CFR 173.29(d) prohibits e mpty 
packaging bearing hazardous materials markings or labels from being used  for 
transportation unless it contains some of the hazardous material for which the markings are required.  
 (3) These restrictions apply even if the packaging is used for purposes other than transportation in the traditional sense. O ffering such a package for sale is 
considered to be offering it for transportation.  
 
e. Consumer commodities (49 CFR 173.1200) . Packages in compliance  with these 
requirements may be combined in a strong overpack with a gross weight that exceeds 65 pounds. The overpack, when marked in accordance with 49 CFR 173.25, can be shipped as a consumer commodity. The 65-pound restriction  is 
intended to limit the weight of individual packages, not the additional overpack (not required by 173.1200).  
 
f. Interchangeab ility of IMO and DOT requirements (49 CFR 176.11(a)) . Hazardous 
materials, except for Class A and B explosives and radioactive materials, may be 
transport ed by vessel when to the material’s  packaging, marking, labeling, 
classification, description, certification, and placarding complies with the IMDG 
Code . All hazardous materials must otherwise be stowed and carried in 
accordance with 49 CFR Subchapter C.  
 
(1) Differences in the stowage and segregation requirements of the DOT and IMO regulations are generally minor, and may be handled by the COTP through approval of alternate stowage procedures authorized by 49 CFR 176.65.  
 (2) The word "may" indicates the opti onal nature of such authorization. For 
example, if a hazardous material is packaged in accordance with DOT but is described, labeled, etc., in accordance with the IMDG Code, it is acceptable for marine shipment.  


g. Motor vehicles and their e quipment (49 CFR 176.905(1)) . The term "equipment" 
includes any devices related to the functioning of a motor vehicle or other 
mechanized equipment. Each item will be considered on an individual basis, with 
the following general exceptions. Fire extinguishers are relat ed to the functioning 
of vehicles in which they are carried because they are essential to fight any  fires  
in the vehicle . By the same reasoning, tire inflators in vehicles also are directly 
related to their functioning. This does not include oxygen tanks , because they  are 
not used directly in association with operation of the vehicle. 
 
(1) Motor vehicles themselves may be shipped as non -hazardous cargo, if -- 
 
(a) Their fuel tanks are emptied;  
 
############
(b) Their engines are run until they stall for lack of fuel;  
 (c) Their battery cables are disconnected; and  
 (d) No hazardous materials are stored in them.  
 
NOTE:  Residual amounts of fuel left in motor vehicle tanks are acceptable. 
Stringent enforcement measures, such as the use of listening tubes, are not required 
for determination that a tank is empty.  
 
 
4. Intermodal Portable Tanks  
 
A portable tank is a container with  a capacity of more than 110 U.S. gallons, which is 
designed to be loaded into or on, or temporarily attached to, a transporting vehicle or 
vessel. It may be equipped with skids, lifting lugs, or intermodal container corner castings to facilitate handling.   Certain DOT and Coast Guard specification portable tanks are explicitly authorized by Subchapter C for the carriage of particular regulated commodities. When a regulated commodity is shipped in such a tank, the marking, labeling, and placarding requirements of 49 CFR Part 172 apply.   Regulated commodities may be transported in non- specification portable tanks when 
authorized by OHMT exempt ion or a Coast Guard Letter of Authorization for 
combustible liquids (see 49 CFR 176.340).  When inspecting a portable tank carrying a regulated commodity, the inspector should be alert to the following items:   
a. Evidence of any leakage from valves, atta chments, or safety relief devices. 


b. Proof that hydrostatic testing has been performed within the prescribed period. 
 
c. Evidence that all required inspections have been performed in a timely manner . 
 d. Evidence that securing and handling attachments ar e sound.  
 e. Evidence of compliance with any special handling or stowage requirements dictated by regulations or exemptions.  
 
 
5. Radioactive Materials  
 
Radioactive materials are regulated under Subchapter C along with other packaged hazardous materials.  For requirements radioactive materials shipments , see 49 CFR 
Part173, Subpart I .  The following pamphlets concerning radioactive materials have been 
published jointly by DOT and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), and may be obtained from Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5):  
 
a. A Guide for the Inspection of Radioactive Material Shipments by Motor Vehicle or at Freight Facilities; and  
 b. A Review of the Department of Transportation (DOT) Regulations for Transportation of Radi oactive Materials.  


6. Liquid Materials Toxic by Inhalation  
 
There are special requirements for liquids that are toxic by inhalation.  A ny material that 
meet s the toxicity criteria found in 49 CFR 173.3a is subject to these requirements. 
 
The following materials are known to be toxic by inhalation:  
Acetone cyanohydrin* Methyl bromide 
Acrolein, inhibited  Methyl chloroformate 
Allyl alcohol Methylchloromethyl ether 
Allylamine*  Methylhydrazine 
Bromine trifluoride  Methyl isocyanate*  
n-Butyl isocyanate* Monochloroacetic acid, liquid 
Chlorine trifluoride  Nickel carbonyl 
Chloroacetonitrile*  Nitric Acid, red fuming  
Chloropicrin  t-Octylmercaptan*  
Crotonaldehyde* Pentaborane 
Dimethylhydrazine, unsymmetrical Phosphorus oxychloride 
Ethyl chloroformate Phosphorus trichloride 
Ethylene chlorohydrin* Propionitrile*  
Ethyleneimine n-Propyl chloroformate* 
Ethyl isocyanate* Tetramethoxy silane*  
Isopropyl chloroformate* Tetranitromethane  
Mesitylene Titanium tetrachloride  
Methacrylonitrile  Trimethoxy silane*  
 
All
 of these materials must have "Poison -Inh
alation Hazard" as a description on the 
shipping papers and be in a packaging with a primary containment unit greater than 1 liter (49 CFR 172.203(k)(4)).  The material’s packag ing, which must have a primary 
containment unit greater than 1 liter, and packaging of less than 110 gallons, must also be marked "Inhalation Hazard" (49 CFR 172.301(a)).  Furthermore, such  packages must be 
labeled and placarded as poisons.  In addition, those materials with an asterisk (*)  in the 
above table are shipped as not otherwise specified materials. These must be transported in either a Poison A packaging or a packaging approved by the Director, OHMT,  
Transportation (Research and Special Programs Administration).  The ap proval is in the 
form of a letter and approval number. Poison A packaging is any appropriate packaging listed in the Poison A materials packaging sections, 49 CFR 173.328 through 173.337. Other packaging is approved on an individual basis.  

############

D. CARRIAGE OF MARINE PORTABLE TANKS  
 
Marine P ortable T anks (MPTs) are liquid-carrying containers that are not permanently 
installed on the vessel . MPTs may be on or offloaded when filled or when empty, or 
filled and discharged while aboard a vessel .  For t he regulations for MPT use , see 46 
CFR 98.30.  MPTs are limited to carriage of certain listed cargoes (see 46 CFR 64.9, 
90.05-35, and 98.30- 3).  Authorization under 46 CFR 98.35 to carry combustible liquids 
aboard vessels in portable tanks constructed and inspected before 1 October 1974, was 
terminated on 1 October 1984.  See  MSM Volume II, Material Inspection, COMDTINST 
M16000.7A (series), Chapter F2 for further information on MPTs. 
 
 
E. CARRIAGE OF EXPLOSIVES  
 
 1. Commercial Explosives  
 
Commercial explosi ves, like other  packaged hazardous materials, are shipped under 49 
CFR Subchapter C.  The shipment of C lass A explosives in intermodal freight containers 
requires  special approval from  Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5). See Paragraph E.3 of this 
Chapter for more details.   The approval document specifies --  
 
a. The condition of the containers (new or like new, with nonmetallic, non- sparking 
interiors, free of protrusions, etc.);  
 b. The handling equipment and sequence of operations to be employed; and  
 c. Stowage , segregation, and firefighting.  
 
NOTE:  Shipments of Class A explosives require COTP issued loading permits.  
 
Also, Class A and B explosives must be shipped under DOT regulations rather than 
IMO classification, even when they are shipped for export . See Paragraph E.4 of 
this C hapter for more information  relating to import shipments.  
 
 
2. Military Explosives  
 
a. General requirements . Marine shipment of military explosives is regulated under 
46 CFR Part 146. T hese regulations are closely tied to the commercial explosives 
regulations in 49 CFR ; these regulations  refer to the marking and labeling 
requirements of 49 CFR Part 172 and the exemption procedures of 49 CFR Part  
107.  


(1) All shipments of military explosives, except those assigned to Coast Guard 
Class I (see 46 CFR 146.29-13) and those carried aboard public vessels, require loading permits from the COTP. The COTP may authorize, in writing, alternate stowage or handling methods based on equivalent safety (see 46 CFR 146.02-25(b)).  
 (2) Most shipm ents of military explosives in intermodal freight containers must be 
approved by Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5) in the same manner as are shipments 
of commercial explosives (see 46 CFR 146.29.11(a)(16)).  
 (3) All other deviations from regulatory transportation req uirements  must be in the 
form of an exemption approved by the Director, OHMT , DOT (see 46 CFR 
 
NOTE:  Commandant (G -ENG) recognizes the problems arising from the existence 
of three regulatory codes applying to the transport of explosives. A rulemaking 
project is nearing completion which will incorporate the military explosives 
requirements into 49 CFR Part 176. This project will also incorporate the United 
Nations' scheme for classification and segregation of all for marine shipment, and 
should provide domestic and international harmony for all explosives. 
 
b. Definition . Military explosives are explosive substances and devices shipped by, 
for, or to the following:  
 
############
(1) Any department or agency of the U.S. Department of Defense; or  
 (2) The government of any country whose defense is deemed vital to the defense of the United States.  
 
(a) The first of the above conditions is self -explanatory.  
 (b) The second refers to a shipment of munitions or other explosives for which the U.S. State De partment Office of Munitions Control has issued a License 
for Export of Defense Articles in accordance with 22 CFR Parts 123 and 126. The State Department's policy is to deny licenses for the export of defense articles to countries or areas with respect to  which the United States 
maintains an arms embargo, or "whenever an export would not otherwise be in furtherance of world peace and the security and foreign policy of the United States" (22 CFR 126.1).  


c. Proper shipping name . The reference in 46 CFR 146.29- 14(c)(4) to "true shipping 
name...specified in 146.29- 100," is a regulatory anachronism which will be 
eliminated by the rulemaking action is effective, military explosives should be 
identified on the Dangerous Cargo Manifest by their DOT proper shippi ng name. 
Each military explosive is assigned a proper shipping name and hazard class on the basis of an examination and tests by a laboratory recognized under 49 CFR 173.86 or 46 CFR 146.20- 14, and approved by the Director, OHMT  or a DOD 
agency authorized to approve explosives under those sections. The proper shipping name on the Dangerous Cargo Manifest should be the same as on the package and the shipping paper s used to  compile the manifest (46 CFR 146.05-
12(a), 146.29- 14(b)). Two sources for proper shipping names assigned to military 
explosives are the following:  
 
(1) Hazard Classification of United States Military Explosives and Hazardous Munitions, U.S. Army Defense Ammunition Center and School, Savanna, IL 61074- 9639, October 1988.  
 (2) Navy Transportation Safety Handbook for Ammunition, Explosives and Related Materials, NAVSEA OP2165, Vol. 2, Commander, Naval Sea Systems Command, July 1986.  
 
d. Compliance with 49 CFR or the IMDG Code . If it is impracticable for a shipment 
of military ex plosives to comply with the handling, stowage, or segregation 
provisions of 46 CFR 146, the COTP may authorize alternative methods in writing (see 46 CFR 146.02- 25). Compliance with the equivalent provisions of 49 
CFR Part 176 or the IMDG Code is appropria te. Authorizations for alternative 
handling, stowage, or segregation should be limited to one ship, one time, otherwise the shipper, carrier, or agent must obtain an exemption from the DOT OHMT  per 49 CFR Part 107, Subpart B. Although the COTP may authoriz e any 
alternative that provides an equivalent level of safety, it is recommended that 
whenever 49 CFR or the IMDG Code is authorized, complete compliance with 
that code should be specified.  
 
e. Classification of military explosives . Figure F5 -3 is a suppl ement to the 
Classification, Handling, and Stowage Chart in 46 CFR 146.29- 100 which may be 
used to determine the Coast Guard stowage class of a military explosive based on 
its DOT proper shipping name and hazard class. It is the responsibility of the shipper to determine the DOT proper shipping name, hazard class, and Coast Guard stowage class of military explosives. In most cases, this information may be readily obtained from the DOD Joint Hazard Classification System or various DOD manuals and publication s.  

############

 
FIGURE F5 -3: 
 
COAST GUARD STOWAGE CLASSES OF MILITARY EXPLOSIVES  
 
This figure  serves  as a link between the DOT  Hazard Classification system in 49 CFR 
Subchapter C and the Coast Guard s towage c lassification system in 46 CFR 146.29.  The 
DOT -authorized proper shipping names that  apply to military explosives items  are listed 
alphabetically . A stowage planner may use  the shipping papers description to  determine 
an item’s  stowage class.  Each line entry contains a DOT proper shipping name, a DOT 
explosives class, and one or more applicable Coast Guard stowage classes.  An  example  
of an item with multiple shipping classes listed would be something like a mmunition for 
cannon with smoke projectile , which may fall into Class II- D, II -E, or II -F, depending 
whether its smoke -making component is phosphorus, hexachloroethane, sulfur 
trioxide/chloro -sulphonic acid, or titanium tetrachloride.  For entries that  list more than 
one Coast Guard stowage class, the planner must have or obtain additional information concerning the construction or explosive composition of the particular item.  When more than one stowage class is listed, the class definitions, descriptions, and examples in the chart, 46 CFR 146.29- 100, should be consulted to determine the applicable st owage 
class.  


 
DOT Proper Shipping Name  DOT Explosive 
Class  Coast Guard 
Stowage Class  
Actuating cartridge, explosive  C I 
Ammunition, chemical, explosive with 
Poison A material  A XI-A, XI -B  
Ammunition, chemical, explosive with 
Poison B material  A XI-A, XI -B 
Ammunition, chemical, explosive with 
irritant material  A XI-B 
Ammunition for cannon with empty 
projectile  B II-B 
Ammunition for cannon with explosive 
projectile  A IV 
Ammunition for cannon with gas 
projectile  A XI-A, XI -B 
Ammunition for cannon with 
illuminating projectile  A IV 
Ammunition for cannon with incendiary 
projectile  A IV 
Ammunition for cannon with inert loaded 
projectile  B II-b 
Ammunition for cannon with smoke 
projectile  A II-D, II -E, II-F 
Ammunition for cannon with solid 
projectile  B II-B 
Ammunition for cannon with tear gas 
projectile  B XI-B 
Ammunition for small arms with 
explosive projectile  A IV 
Ammunition for small arms with 
incendiary projectile  A IV  
 
Black powder  A IX-A 
Black powder igniter with empty 
cartridge bag  C I 
Booster, explosive  A VIII, X -A 
Burster, explosive  C X-A 
Cannon primer  C I, III 
Cartridge bags, empty with black powder 
igniter  C I 
Cartridge, practice ammunition  C I, II-B, II-C 
Chemical ammunition, non-explosive  
(See NOTE A)  Irritant  XI-B 


DOT Proper Shipping Name  DOT Explosive 
Class  Coast Guard 
Stowage Class  
Chemical ammunition, non -explosive  Poison A  XI-A, XI -B 
Chemical ammunition, non -explosive  Poison B  XI-A, XI -B 
Combination fuse  C III 
Combination primer  C I, III 
Cord, detonating  A I, VIII  
Cord, detonating (See  NOTE B)  C I 
Delay electric igniter  C II-C 
Detonating fuse, Class A explosive  A VI, VIII  
Detonating fuse, Class C explosive  C I, III 
Detonating primers, Class A explosive  A VIII 
Detonating primers, Class C explosive  C III 
Detonators, Class A explosive (See 
NOTE C)  A VIII 
Detonators Class C explosive  C VIII 
Electric squib  C II-C 
Empty cartridge bag with black powder 
igniter  C I 
Empty cartridge case, primed  C I 
Explosive bomb  A II-E, II-G, II -J, VIII, 
X-A, X -B, XI -A, XI -B 
Explosive cable cutter  C I 
Explosive mine  A IV, VII, X -A, X -B, 
XI-A, XI -B 
Explosive power device, Class B  B II-B 
Explosive power device, Class C  C I 
Explosive projectile (See NOTE D)  A II-D, V, VII, X -A, X -
B, XI -A, XI -B 
Explosive release device  C I 
Explosive rivet  C I 
Explosive torpedo  A X-A, X -B 
Fireworks, common  C II-C 
Fireworks, special  B II-B, II-C, II-D, II -E, 
II-G, II -J 
Flexible linear shaped charge, metal clad  C VIII 
Fuse igniter  C II-C 
Fuse, instantaneous  C II-C 
Fuse lighter  C I, II-C 
Fuse mild detonating, metal -clad C III 
Fuse safety  C I 
Fuze, combination  C III 

############

DOT Proper Shipping Name  DOT Explosive 
Class  Coast Guard 
Stowage Class  
Fuze, detonating  A VI, VIII  
Fuze, detonating, Class C explosive  C I 
Fuze, detonating, radioactive  A VI, VIII  
Fuze, percussion  C I, III, VIII  
Fuze, time  C I, III, VIII  
Fuze, tracer  C III 
Grenade, empty primed  C I 
Grenade, hand or rifle, explosive  A II-J, IV  
Grenade, tear gas (See NOTE A)  Irritant  XI-B 
Grenade (with incendiary material)  B II-J 
Grenade (with Poison A material)  Poison A  XI-A, XI -B 
Grenade (with Poison B material)  Poison B  II-D, II -E, II-F 
Grenade (with smoke charge)  C II-D, II -E, II-F 
Hand signal device  C II-C 
High explosive  A IX-A, IX -B 
High explosive liquid  A IX-A, IX -B 
Igniter  C I, II-C, II-D, II -J 
Igniter cord  C I 
Igniter, fuse, metal -clad C III 
Igniter, jet thrust (JATO)  A IX-A 
Igniter, jet thrust (JATO)  B III 
Igniter, rocket motor  A IX-A 
Igniter, rocket motor  B III 
Initiating explosive  A IX-C 
Jet thrust unit  A X-C 
Jet thrust unit  B II-B 
Low explosive  A IX-A 
Percussion cap  C I, III, VIII  
Percussion fuze  C I, III, VIII  
Propellant explosive  A II-A, IX -A 
Propellant explosive in water  B IX-A 
Propellant explosive in water, unstable 
condemned, or deteriorated (See NOTE 
E) B IX-A 
Propellant explosive, liquid  B IX-A 
Propellant explosive, solid  B II-A, IX -A 
Rocket ammunition with empty, inert or 
solid loaded projectile  A II-B 
Rocket ammunition with empty projectile  B II-B 
Rocket ammunition with explosive 
projectile  A IV, X -C, X -D 


DOT Proper Shipping Name  DOT Explosive 
Class  Coast Guard 
Stowage Class  
Rocket ammunition with gas projectile  A XI-A, XI -B 
Rocket ammunition with illuminating 
projectile  A IV 
Rocket ammunition with incendiary 
projectile  A IV 
Rocket ammunition with inert loaded 
projectile  B II-B 
Rocket ammunition with smoke 
projectile  A II-D, II -F 
Rocket ammunition with solid projectile  B I-B 
Rocket engine, liquid  B II-B, X -E 
Rocket head  A II-D, VII, X -A, X -B, 
XI-A, XI -B 
Rocket motor  A X-C 
Rocket motor  B II-C 
Safety fuse  C I 
Safety squib  C II-C 
Signal flare  C II-C 
Small -arms ammunition  C I 
Small -arms ammunition (for personal 
care or household use) (See NOTE F)  ORM -D I 
Small -arms ammunition, irritating 
cartridge  C I 
Small -arms primer  C I 
Smoke candle  C II-C, II-D, II -E, II-F 
Smokeless powder for small -arms  Flam. Sld.  IX-A 
Smoke pot  C II-C, II-E 
Smoke signal  C II-C 
Starter cartridge  B II-A 
Starter cartridge  C I, II-C 
Supplementary charge (explosive)  A IX-B 
Torpedo, railway  B II-C 
Tracer  C II-C 
Tracer fuze  C III 


DOT Proper Shipping Name  DOT Explosive 
Class  Coast Guard 
Stowage Class  
 
NOTES:   
A. The hazard class formerly identified as "Poison C" is now "Irritating Material."  
B. Replaces former description "Cordeau detonant."  
C. Replaces former descriptions "Blasting caps," "Blasting caps with safety fuse," 
and Electric blasting caps."  
D. The DOD publications from which Figure 29- 3 was compiled list no DOD 
ammunition items in Co ast Guard Stowage Class V. However, such items may 
exist. If a DOD agency ships explosive projectiles containing "Explosive D" (ammonium picrate), CG Class V may be used.  
E. The hazard of propellant explosive (smokeless powder) in water, even when unstabl e, condemned, or deteriorated is flammability, not mass detonation. 
Therefore, its DOT hazard class is Class B explosive.  
F. Small arms ammunition, DOT Class C explosive, in the forms, quantities, and packagings specified in 49 CFR 173.1201, may be reclas sified as "Consumer 
Commodity" (DOT Class ORM -D). Although no known DOD ammunition item 
is classed as ORM- D, it is possible that small arms ammunition so classed might 
be shipped on board a vessel with military explosives. When is the case, Coast 
Guard Cla ss I applies for stowage purposes.  

############

 
3. Commandant Approvals for Shipment of Explosives  
 
The following information concerns requirements for explosives , including approvals 
issued by Commandant ( CG-ENG) for equipment used in handling and transporting 
military and Class A explosives.   
a. The shipment of explosives by cargo vessel is regulated by 46 CFR Part 146 (military explosives) and 49 CFR 171- 179 (all other types of explosives). The 
following provi sions of these regulations authorize Commandant ( CG-ENG) to 
approve certain equipment used in handling or transporting military and Class A explosives:  
 
(1) 46 CFR 146.29- 42 and 49 CFR 176.76(a): Authorizes Commandant ( CG-
MTH) to approve transport vehicle s and freight containers for the 
transportation of military and Class A explosives.  
 (2) 49 CFR 176.78(d): Prohibits use of power -operated industrial trucks in holds 
and compartments containing explosives, unless approved by Commandant (CG-522).  
 (3) 49 CFR 176.150(b): Authorizes Commandant ( CG-ENG) to approve the 
construction, handling, and stowage of portable magazines with capacity exceeding 110 cubic feet.  
 
b. To implement the above regulations, Commandant ( CG-ENG) issues a 
Commandant Coast Guard Approva l (CGA), an approval that may be issued to a 
shipper, a carrier, or , for an import shipment, a consignee.  
 
(1) A person whose shipment of explosives would be affected by any of the above regulations should apply in writing or by Telex to Commandant ( CG-MTH), 
U.S. Coast Guard, Washington, DC 20593- 0001 (Telex No. 892427) for an 
approval.  
 (2) A shipper should have a valid CGA in hand when applying for a permit to 
handle designated dangerous cargo, i.e., military or Class A explosives, under 33 CFR 126.17 and 49 CFR 176.100.  
 (3) Figures F5 -4 and F5- 5 provide a sample CGA and a list of CGAs that are 
currently in effect.  


c. CGAs issued since 1983 for the transportation of military or Class A explosives 
in freight containers and portable magazines have an open- ended expiration 
provision. Most other CGAs expire 2 years after their date of issue. The person or organization in whose name a CGA is issued may not transfer that CGA to another person or organization. If a company changes its name, address, or corporate affiliation, it must apply for a new or amended CGA.  
 d. OCMIs  and COTPs should ensure that shippers, carriers, and others responsible 
for shipments of explosives are aware of the requirements concerning CGAs, and when a CGA is required, that the shipment is made in accordance with its terms.  
 
FIGURE F5 -4: SAMPLE COMMANDANT COAST GUARD APPROVAL 
NUMBER 012 -85 
 In accord ance with Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart 176.76, and Title 46 
Code of Federal Regulations, Subsection 146.29- 11(c)(16), approval is hereby granted to 
Ewing Energy Corporation, 10000 Main Street, Dallas, TX 75240, for the shipment of Class A and military explosives in freight containers subject to the following conditions:   
1. VESSELS: "Containership" or "Trailership" as defined in 49 CFR 171.8, or any "Cargo Vessel" as defined in 49 CFR 171.8 which has been specifically modified for the carriage of freight containers or can accommodate on deck stowage thereof.  
 2. PORTS: Any " Designated Waterfront Facility" as specified in 33 CFR 126.05(a), 
for which the captain of the port has issued the permit required in 33 CFR 126.17.  
 3. CONTAINERS: "Freight containers," as defined in 49 CFR 171.8, must meet the following physical require ments as determined by visual inspection.  For a 
shipment entering the United States from a foreign country, Ewing Energy Corporation or their authorized agent must provide the captain of the port with a written certification that the containers meet these  requirements.  
 
############
a. Only closed freight containers may be used for the carriage of Class A and military explosives under the terms of this approval. Closed freight containers are defined as containers which totally enclose the contents by permanent structu res. An open freight container which is covered by a tarpaulin or similar 
fabric or plastic cover is not considered a closed freight container.  
 b. Freight containers shall be clean enough, inside and out, to permit detailed inspection and ensure freedom from any residue of previous cargoes.  
 
c. Freight containers shall be structurally sound and weathertight. Major defects in the main structural members that affect the structural integrity of the freight container are unacceptable. Main structural members consist of top and bottom 


side rails, top and bottom end rails, door sill and headers, corner posts, corner 
fittings, and floor crossmembers. Major defects are defined as holes, tears, fractures, or cracked or suspect welds. Dents or bends in a surface of  main 
structural members exceeding 0.75 inch (19mm) in depth, regardless of length, are unacceptable. More than two splices per bottom or top side rail, more than one splice in the top or bottom end rail or door header, and any splice in the door sill or c orner posts are unacceptable. Butt -welded, inset splices are the 
only acceptable repairs when splicing is permitted in main structural members. Dimensional distortion that does not permit proper engagement of lifting or tie -
down devices is unacceptable.  
 d. There shall be no wastage of metal (or signs of wastage that may have been covered with paint or otherwise concealed) in any structural component.  Deterioration in any component of a freight container, whether of ferrous or nonferrous material construct ion, such as rusted- out metal in sidewalls or 
disintegrated fiberglass, is unacceptable. Normal wear, including oxidation (rust), and minor damage that does not affect the structural integrity or weathertightness of the freight container are acceptable. Lap- welded or buck-
riveted patches in the walls, roof, floor, and doors are acceptable if neatly made and weathertight and not affecting the structural integrity of the container.  
 e. Each container must bear, in addition to a manufacturer's data plate, a CSC Safety Approval Plate; or, if in transportation between points within the United States as defined in 49 CFR 171.8, a decal or other certification showing that the container was built to, and met the requirements of, the International 
Convention for Sa fe Containers or the rules of a recognized classification 
society. These organizations are: American Bureau of Shipping; Germanischer Lloyd; Registro Italiano Navale; Nippon Kaiji Kyokai; Lloyd's Register of Industrial Services; Bureau Veritas; Det Norske Veritas; Register of Shipping of the USSR; and Polish Register of Shipping. A certification by a recognized inspection organization that is not listed here may also be acceptable and may be verified by Commandant ( CG-MTH -1), U.S. Coast Guard, phone 202- 267-
1577.  
 f. The interior of the container shall be a nonmetallic surface free of protrusions and nonsparking in nature. Floors shall be wood or wood- covered. Steel and 
aluminum containers shall be lined with a minimum of 1/4- inch plywood. Metal 
parts of fi berglass containers shall be covered with a minimum of 1/4- inch 
plywood. , All linings shall extend from the floor to the height of the lading or higher.  

############

g. Cargo placed in each container shall be adequately blocked, braced, and secured 
in conformance w ith the requirements of 49 CFR 176.76(a)(2) and to the 
satisfaction of the captain of the port. [NOTE: Paragraphs 3(h) and 3(i) apply to Roll-On, Roll -Off service only.]  
 h. Each container used for the carriage of explosives in Roll -On, Roll -Off service 
shall be permanently attached to a chassis (i.e., a trailer vehicle) or secured to a 
container chassis specifically designed to accommodate freight containers. Freight containers on flat bed trailers are prohibited.  
 i. Closed van trailers manufactured and  tested in accordance with Association of 
American Railroads (AAR) Specification No. M -931, and meeting the structural 
requirements contained in P aragraph 3, excluding S ubparagraph 3(e), are 
authorized for the carriage of explosives and do not require a CS C Safety 
Approval Plate or a classification society decal.  
 4. INSPECTION:  
 
a. For a shipment originating in the United States, the captain of the port or an authorized representative may inspect the loaded containers before they are placed on the vessel . Containers which exhibit defects or damage to any of the 
structural, supporting, or lifting components, or containers in which the lading is not properly secured, will not be permitted on board the vessel.  
 b. For a shipment entering the United States f rom a foreign nation, the captain of 
the port or an authorized representative may inspect the loaded containers before they are unloaded from the vessel. Containers which exhibit defects or damage to any of the structural, supporting, or lifting components , or containers 
in which the lading is not properly secured, may be prohibited from removal from the vessel.  
 
5. CARGO GEAR: Except in the case of an emergency, cargo gear which is used to load, off -load, or handle freight containers of explosives is limi ted to cargo gear 
which has been specifically designed or modified for the handling of freight containers. The Safe Working Load of the cargo gear shall be verified by a valid certificate issued by a recognized testing or regulatory agency. The Safe Workin g 
Load must be equivalent to or greater than the weight of the heaviest explosives -
laden freight container to be transferred by such gear. Prior to the handling of any freight container loaded with explosives using ship's equipment, the master of the vessel or an authorized representative, or the Officer in Charge of a Coast Guard Explosives Loading Detail, if assigned, shall inspect the cargo gear to ensure that it is in safe working condition. In the case where shore -based equipment is used, the  
Terminal Operator or an authorized representative, or the Coast Guard Officer in Charge shall conduct the inspection to ensure that the cargo gear is in safe working 


condition. In the event that a valid certificate indicating the Safe Working Load for 
cargo gear is not available, or if any discrepancies are discovered in the inspection of the cargo gear, it must be dynamically tested with an inert proof load equivalent to at least 150 percent of the weight of the heaviest container to be transferred. In no case shal l this 150 percent proof load exceed the weight of the proof load used in 
the prior certification of the cargo gear.  
 6. HANDLING: The handling of the containers of explosives during either loading or unloading operations must be scheduled such that the c ontainers are moved in and 
out of the port area as quickly as possible. Storage of containers of explosives in the port area is not permitted except as specifically authorized by the captain of the port and the local port authority.  
 7.  STOWAGE/SEGREGATI ON:  
 
############
a. On containerships, containers of explosives may be stowed and secured "on deck" or "under deck away from heat" as defined in 49 CFR 176.63.  When below deck stowage is utilized, the containers must be the last cargo to be stowed under the deck, and the hatches must be closed immediately after stowage is completed and before continuing loading of containers in other hatches or on deck.  
 b. On cargo vessels which are not containerships, containers of explosives must be stowed and secured "on deck" only, except that these containers may be stowed below deck, away from heat, in holds only which have been modified 
specifically for the carriage of containers in cellular guides or the equivalent. Stowage in other than cellular guides shall be to the satis faction of the captain 
of the port.  
 c. On trailerships, "on deck" stowage may be in accordance with 49 CFR 176.76(e). Container chassis units must be secured to structural portions of the body of the vessel to the satisfaction of the captain of the port. Tiedowns and lashings to the units will be made to proper fittings provided on the units.  
 d. The on deck stowage locations for any vessel described above must be such that the containers of explosives are protected from boarding seas by ship's structures, other containers, or artificial barrie rs, to the greatest extent possible.  
 e. The segregation requirements of 49 CFR 176 apply to shipments by vessel. If the commodities being shipped require segregation, the separation shall be equal to or greater than the requirements for "separated from" segregation defined in 49 CFR 176.83. Containers shall be effectively secured to prevent movement during the voyage.  


8. FIREFIGHTING/EMERGENCY ACTION: Firefighting equipment capable of 
reaching and piercing the containers loaded with explosives must be r eadily 
accessible to each container during unloading operations. Fire hoses shall be laid out and charged during handling operations.  
 9. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS: Any incident occurring while shipping Class A and military explosives under the terms of this  approval shall be reported in 
accordance with 49 CFR 171.16. In addition, a copy shall be immediately forwarded to the Commandant (G -ENG), U.S. Coast Guard, Washington, DC 
 10. In addition to any special requirements prescribed herein, all applicable DOT 
Regulations, 49 CFR 171- 179, apply to shipments of Class A and military 
explosives in freight containers or transport vehicles.  
 11.  A copy of this approval must be on board ea ch vessel transporting Class A and 
military explosives under the provisions of this approval.  
 12.  EXPIRATION DATE: This approval remains in effect unless withdrawn, 
superseded by a revised approval, or the regulations are amended to cover the provisions  of this approval.  
 AUTHORIZED BY:    
A. B. CEE / Date  Commander, U.S. Coast Guard  Chief, Hazardous Materials Branch  Marine Technical and Hazardous Materials Division  By direction of the Commandant  


FIGURE F5 -5: COMMANDANT COAST GUARD APPROVAL (CGA) IN 
EFFECT 01APR89  
 
CGA #  COMPANY  * CGA #  COMPANY  * 
Rev. 1 Nissho Iwai 
American Corp. 2 004-80, 
Rev. 3 Petty -Ray 
Div., 
Geosource, 
Inc. 2 
Rev. 1  Zim Container 
Service.  1 006-81, 
Rev. 1  Olin Corp.  1 
Rev. 2  Alaska Explosives 
Ltd. 1 013-81, 
Rev. 1  Government 
of Portugal  1 
Rev. 1 Kerr Steamship Co.  1 018-81, 
Rev. 2 Schlumberge
r Well 
Services  1 
Rev. 2 Dept. of Defense  1 020-81, 
Rev. 2 Atlas Powder 
International 
Ltd. 1 
Rev. 1  Norton Lilly and 
Co. 1 005-82, 
Rev. 1 Atlas Powder 
Co. 1 
008-82 Matson Agencies, 
Inc. 1 011-82, 
Rev. 1  Pacific 
Powder Co.  1 
Rev. 1  Barber Steamship 
Lines  1 018-82, 
Rev. 1  Baker Sand 
Control  1 
Rev. 2 Pacific Powder Co.  2 003-83, 
Rev. 2 U.S. 
International 
Mgt & Mktg  1 
Rev. 1  Goex, Inc.  1 006-83, 
Rev. 1  Ensign 
Bickford  1 
Rev. 1 Hercules, Inc.  1 011-83, 
Rev. 1 German 
Military Representati
ve 1 
013-83 Coonies 
Explosives, Inc. 1 014-83 Action 
Manufacturin
g Co.  1 
015-83 Expro Chemical 
Products  1 001-84 Pengo 
International  1 
002-84 Austin Powder  1 004-84 Gearhart 
Industries  1 
005-84 Alaska Explosives  2 006-84 Koek Freight 
Co. 1 

############

CGA #  COMPANY  * CGA #  COMPANY  * 
007-84 Berg Boat Co.  1 008-84 E. I. Du Pont 
de Nemours 
& Co.  1 
009-84 ASCA Marine Inc.  1 010-84, 
Rev. 1 Nat’l 
Shipping 
Lines of 
Saudi Arabia  1 
011-84 Petro – Systems, 
Inc. 1 012-84 N.L. 
McCullough 
Industries  1 
013-84 Pakistan National 
Shipping Corp. 1 001-85 Sherwood 
International 
Corp.  1 
002-85 Accurate 
International 1 003-85, 
Rev. 1 Transatlantic
a Agency 
USA  1 
004-85 Braintree 
Companies  3 005-85, 
Rev. 1  Nedlloyd 
Lines  1 
006-85 Pacific Powder Co.  4 007-85 Jet Research 
Center, Inc.  1 
008-85 Southwest 
Explosives  1 001-86 Satin Air 
Freight  1 
002-86 Israel Military 
Industries  1 003-86 Southwest 
Explosives  2 
004-86 Thermex Energey 
Corp. 1 005-86 Lykes Bros. 
Steamship 
Co. 1 
006-86 Government Supply 
Co. 1 007-86 Farrell Lines  1 
008-86 Phillips -Parr, Inc.  1 009-86 Ireco, Inc.  1 
010-86 Puerto Rico Marine 
Management  1 011-86 Mitsui 
O.S.K. Lines  1 
012-86 Scol Shipping 
(N.A.)  1 001-87 Beaufort 
Shipping, 
Inc. 1 
002-87 MacDonnel -
Douglas Aerospace 1 003-87 Ridgeway 
International, Ltd. 1 
004-87 C.C.C. Georgia, 
Inc. 1 005-87 ETI 
Explosive Technologies 
Int’l 3 


CGA #  COMPANY  * CGA #  COMPANY  * 
006-87 ETI Explosive 
Technologies Int’l  2 007-87 ETI 
Explosive 
Technologies 
Int’l 1 
008-87 Texas Instruments, 
Inc. 1 009-87 M. L. 
Marketing 
Company  1 
010-87 Navigest, Inc.  1 011-87 Embassy of 
Australia  1 
012-87 Trojan Corporation  1 013-87 Johns 
Hopkins 
University  1 
014-87 Empremar Line  1 001-88 Alaska 
Explosives, 
Ltd. 4 
002-88 Solar Int’l Shipping 
Agency 1 003-88 LTV 
Missiles and 
Electronics  1 
004-88 Atlas Powder Co.  4 005-88 Hardrock 
Construction 
Co. 1 
006-88 Woods Hole 
Oceanographic 
Institute  2 007-88 Western 
Atlas 
International  1 
008-88 Marine Specialty, 
Inc. 1 009-88 Pan Oceans, 
Inc. 1 
010-88 Alaska Explosives, 
Ltd. 1 011-88 Demex 
International, 
Ltd. 1 
012-88 Marine Specialty, 
Inc. 2 013-88 Raytheon 
Company  1 
014-88 Dock Express 
Contractors, Inc. 1 015-88 Kintetsu 
Intermodal 
(U.S.A.)  1 
016-88 Loral Hycor, Inc.  1 017-88 Fire Art 
Corporation  1 
018-88 Western State 
Energy Co.  1 019-88 Zai Chem, 
Inc. 1 
001-89 Hogg Robinson 
(G.F.A.), Ltd. 1 002-89 Naval 
Weapons Sta, Concord, 
CA 3 


CGA #  COMPANY  * CGA #  COMPANY  * 
003-89 Old Dominion 
Stevedoring Corp. 3 004-89 Guiberson 
Div., Dresser 
Industries, 
Inc. 1 
005-89 Royal Ordnance, 
plc. 1 006-89 Otter Creek 
Chemical 
Corp.  1 
 
*NOTES:  
1. Freight container for military or Class A explosives  
2. Oversize portable magazine  
3. Industrial truck for use in explosives hold  
4. Class A explosives in rail freight car 


 
4. Import Shipments of Explosives  
 
Import shipments of military, Class A, and Class B explosives must be in complete compliance with the applicable provisions of 46 and 49 CFR. The option of complying with the IMDG Code does not extend to these shipments.  An import shipment of military or Class A explosives in a freight container or oversize portable magazine must be in compliance with a CGA issued by Commandant ( CG-ENG) .  
 
 
5. Testing and Approval of Explosives ("EX" Numbers)  
 
Every non- military explosive  transported within the United States must have been tested 
and approved in accordance with 49 CFR 173.86 or 171.19.  Military explosives must have been tested and approved in accordance with 46 CFR 146.20- 13.  If a COTP has 
any doubt about the proper shipping name or hazard classification of an explosives shipment, the shipper may be requested to provide documentation of the approval.  Approvals issued by the DOT's OHMT are identified by a seven digit number prefixed by the letters "EX ." Approvals issued by other agencies have been grandfathered and remain 
valid. Figure F5 -6 provides a sample OHMT explosives classification approval letter.  
COTPs should ensure that foreign shippers, importers, or their agents are aware of this requireme nt and have obtained a valid OHMT approval before attempting to import 
explosives of foreign origin.  

############

 
FIGURE F5 -6: SAMPLE OHMT EXPLOSIVES CLASSIFICATION APPROVAL 
 
 
April 30, 1987 
 Mr. J. R. Ewing  Ewing Energy Corporation  10000 Main Street  Dallas, TX 75240   Dear Mr. Ewing:   Based on the documentation submitted by Ewing Energy Corporation in accordance with Sections 173.86 and 173.114a, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, the new explosive products listed below have been approved for shi pment and are hereby classified as 
follows:   
Reference Product Designation Description  Hazard Class 
EX-8604670 001-3700-473 Detonators Class A explosives 
EX-8604671 001-3700-453 Detonators Class A explosives 
 
Only explosives and explosive devices as described in the recommending agency report are authorized.   
Sh
ould you have any questions regarding these classifications, please call this office at 
(202) 366 -4514.  
 Si
ncerely,  
    X. Y. Zee  Chief, Approvals Branch  Office of Hazardous Materials Transportation  


 
6. Segregation of Containerized Explosives  
 
49 CFR 176.83(a) prohibits the stowage of incompatible explosives in the same hold or compartment.  On containerships , this prohibition may be impracticable when it is 
necessary to stow freight containers containing incompatible explosives. In this case, a COTP may authorize as alternative stowage "separate from" segregation in accordance with 49 CFR 176.83(d)(3)(ii)(A), which provides an equivalent level of safety.  
 
 
F. SHIPS' STORES  
 
 1. Introduction 
 
Hazardous materials used as ships' stores (i.e., other than as fuel for the main propulsion plant) are regulated under 46 CFR Part 147.  T he term “ ships' stores”  does not apply only 
to small containers. Some vessels have large, boxed deck tanks for such stores (e.g., a deck tank carrying nitrogen as an inert gas supply).  
 
 
2. Authorization for Carriage  
 
A hazardous material may be carried on board a vessel as a ships' store if it is labeled according to 46 CFR 147.30 and if it is not prohibited in 46 CFR Part 147, Subpart B . 
Certain materials, including flammable liquids not addressed in 46 CFR Part 147 Subpart B, Class A Explosives, and Class A Poisons must be ap proved for carriage by 
Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5). A list of materials approved under this provision may be 
obtained from Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5).  Waivers of any of the carriage requirements 
in 46 CFR Part 147 may also be obtained from Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5) as detailed in 
46 CFR 147.9.   


G. FUMIGATION  
 
Interim regulations for shipboard fumigation are located in 46 CFR 147A. They apply to foreign and U.S. vessels as described in 46 CFR 146.02-2.   
NOTE: These regulations are under review, having been found inadequate to 
address unmanned barges, LASH or SEABEE type barges carried aboard ship, and 
intermodal freight containers.  
 
The rules for these particular applications are contained in two special permi ts: SP 
2-75 and SP 52-75. 
 Questions should be directed to Commandant ( CG-ENG- 5).  
 